Oh!  had I Nature's magic key to ope
The fairy chambers of the sanguine mind,
To enter by the golden gate of hope,
Leaving my sorrows and my cares behind,
On Fancy's pinions swifter than the wind,
To make the future than the past more fair,
A place of ever-during rest to find!
Nor doubt nor dark despondency is there,
Beyond the hated dome, where dwells the fiend Despair.

For on my pilgrimage of life below
I've known variety of light and shade,
The glimpse of joy, the moonless night of woe,
The buds of hope that blossom'd but to fade,
The breach of vows at Friendship's altar made,
The pangs of heart no balsam could assuage,
Abandoned where my love devotion paid,
By calumny exposed to hatred's rage,
Without a sun to cheer the winter of my age.

But though the sun that wades the wintry clouds
Looks coldly through the flakes of drifting snow,
Above those mists no veil his brightness shrouds,
There undiminished all his splendors glow;
Such in the weeping wilderness below
Is the dark atmosphere of man's estate,
Chilled and obscured by wretchedness and woe;
Beyond the darkness lights of glory wait,
Where injured Innocence is freed from storms of fate.

The scene of grief might melt a heart of stone,
When Meredyth with throes of anguish found
Mervyn, who sat disconsolate alone,
On ashes of the grove that strewed the ground;
The reliques of religion scattered round,
The oak of honour stript beside him lay,
A wreath of misletoe his temples bound,
Which he had risked his life to snatch away
From the green tree that fell on Cambria's fatal day.

He did not weep; his grief, too big for tears,
For ever closed the sluices of his eye,
The present ills had banished future fears,
Nor, 'mid a nation's lamentable cry,
Had he a thought of private misery;
Desert and dark the gods had left the grove,
Without a ray of hope to gild the sky,
No more to shed in mercy from above,
The dews of piety, the sun of heavenly love.

"Does valour sleep?  Is liberty no more?"
Unsullied by defeat, the youth exclaimed;
"Oh!  is the fair career of virtue o'er,
The daring spirit quenched through ages famed;
Shall the long list of heroes, never named
But glory sounds the trumpet of applause,
Look down from heights of heaven and be ashamed,
Of a degenerate race!  Let honour's laws
Forbid the sordid stain, forbid it freedom's cause!"

"Oh!  all, my son, is lost," the Druid cries;
The hall of kings, with cottage of the plain,
In darkness and in desolation lies;
Red with a people's blood, the rivers stain
The dark green waters of the sounding main;
The fires the venerable oak consume,
The foot-prints of an impious foe profane
The groves where virtue shone in freshest bloom,
The incense of the just arose in sweet perfume.

"Cona no more with love shall light thine eyes;
The cherished idol of thy soul's devotion
Swathed in green weeds beneath the billow lies,
Her requiem sung by murmurs of the ocean.
Her heart, alive to every slight emotion,
The tidings of thy fall could ill sustain;
She drunk despair in sorrow's bitter potion,
Then wildly rushed to rock that skirts the main,
And smiling sunk in death, no more to rise again.

"Nay weep not!  what is kindred, joy and love?
The Gods and Liberty have left the land,
The streams cut off that flowed from heaven above,
Like dews on the parched grass with influence bland,
The pillars of the world no longer stand,
At once religion, freedom, virtue fall,
By unrelenting fate's supreme command;
The earthquake rocks the centre of the ball,
Chaos again returns, and blackness covers all."

"Oh!  would that I had died when Cambria fell,"
Cried Meredyth, "where sons of glory rest,
Whose bright achievements many an age shall tell,
Who in the sky are with their fathers blest!
Amid the wreck I hoped, at heaven's behest,
One little cherished flower might still remain,
Of sweet perfume, to blossom in my breast,
Which I might shelter from the winds and rain,
From colds and blighting blasts, but all my hopes are vain.

"Oh!  Cona!  were I still possessed of thee,
A perished crown should cost me not a sigh;
But, from the galling cares of greatness free,
Gladly I should the path of glory fly,
To bask me in the sunshine of thine eye,
That might awhile have cheered the dreary waste,
Where ruins of a fallen country lie.
With thee even servitude had been embraced;
Without thee, joys of heaven I could no longer taste.

"Oh!  give me but revenge, and welcome death!
How sweet the fires that inly blaze to slake
With blood of foes, then to resign my breath,
On Cona's bosom my soft bed to make,
While ocean's weeping waves the dirge may take
From the hill maids that stand afar and sigh,
And oft the surge the plaintive strain may wake
Beneath the silence of the summer sky,
Kissing the silver cave, entombed where lovers lie."

"Oh!  talk not so," the Druid calmly said,
Nor sink in darkness of despondency;
Arouse thy soul, thy country claims thy aid,
Thou knowest not, but by heaven's supreme decree,
Thy arm is doomed to set Britannia free."
Alas!  his fond predictions were in vain;
For, winding round a neighbouring rock, they see
The foe with dagger dyed in blood of slain,
Prepared around their limbs to bind the galling chain.

A gallant fleet was riding in the bay,
The flag was proudly floating in the gale,
The shouts of triumph and of joy that day
Were mingled with the weeping orphan's wail;
The victors dash'd the oar, and trimm'd the sail,
In cadence to gay music's merry tone;
Along the shore, and far adown the vale,
Was heard the loud lament and stifled groan,
The aged mother's cries, the lovelorn maiden's moan.

Who may describe the agony of grief,
When from the son the sire was torn away,
The sorrows that expected not relief,
When on the husband's neck the consort lay,
Her joy in sunshine, in the storm her stay,
When beauty sunk upon a lover's breast,
As pale and cold as monumental clay,
The widow's woes who saw by hands unblest,
Her son in fetters bound, her hope's sole earthly rest!

The swelling sails were glittering like the snow,
The wing-like oars were silvered o'er with spray,
The sun on dewy showers that laved the prow,
In hues of beauty flung the rainbow's ray,
A thousand streamers flaunted in the day;
The victors and the vanquished side by side
Beheld the glorious sight, the one a prey
To misery, the other puffed with pride
Vainly conceived himself to the high heavens allied.

Still turned the captive's eye to Cambria's strand,
That rapidly was swimming from the sight,
Till every hill of green and head of land
From the strained vision in a backward flight,
With feeble ray was glimmering in the light;
But when beneath the billow sunk the shore,
And the last lofty peak of mountain height,
Then burst a groan might rend the bosom's core,
As if the sun had set to light the sky no more.

Above the gloom the Druid smiled serene,
As lingering sun-shine gilds the mountain's head,
While pensive eve in garb of grey is seen,
With gathering shades the vales below to spread;
To hope in heaven he like a father led
His weeping children overwhelmed by care,
In spirit of the mourner comfort bred,
Pouring the balm of consolation fair,
And gently raising him from deeps of black despair.

"You see yon little sparkling rock," he cries,
"Like a fair jewel on the ocean's breast;
Today it smiles beneath benignant skies,
Warm'd by the sun, by amorous waves carest;
Tomorrow hills of foam its head molest:
Such is man's state on changeful tide of life,
By favouring stars and gentle breezes blest;
Anon there comes an angry tempest, rife
With fortune's fatal gusts and overwhelming strife.

"Your sons again may see the groves arise,
May hear the song of peace and freedom ring,
For them again the gods may leave the skies:
For you celestial joys are on the wing,
As barren winter brightens into spring,
A land invites whose summers never fade,
Beneath the rose where lurks no deadly sting,
The sunshine of whose skies no tempests shade,
Where famine does not come nor foemen make afraid."

The silent winds no longer stirred the shrouds,
The spirit of the ocean was opprest,
Heaving no waves, the thin and fleecy clouds
Lay motionless upon the welkin's breast;
It seemed as nature's pulses were at rest;
Languid the sailor stood, and sighed for breath;
The grey-haired east, the north and balmy west,
Slept in their caves, and all were still as death,
But soon by demon woke, were roused to sable wrath.

With fearful gloom the storm began to lower,
Along the sky the eddying whirlwinds blew,
Torrents of rain and fire in mingled shower,
Through heaven on pinions of the tempest flew;
The thunders roared as if the infernal crew
Had burst the gates of hell to rend in twain
The firmament, and chaos to renew,
To quench the stars with waters of the main,
Confounding sea and air and earth's extended plains

The sky was dark as mansions of the grave,
Save when in rolling sheets the levin came,
To light the horrors of the boiling wave
And warrior's visage with the ghastly flame,
His starting eye, raised locks, and shuddering frame.
A tomb was opening in each surge that fell,
To close the captive's woes, and victor's fame,
And frequent as the peal was heard to swell,
It seemed to ring aloud the sea boy's funeral knell.

Three days the bark was tossing on the main,
Days scarce distinguishable from the night;
The efforts of the mariner were vain,
The sea was blazing in sulphureous light,
The fiery waves were rolling on the sight,
Like fluctuating flame in furnace pent,
When fraught with ruin from the heavenly height,
Cleaving a cloud a thunderbolt was sent,
And seam of Mervyn's bark with a wide window rent.

One cry of horror rose, and all was still,
Save roaring of the thunder and the ocean;
But Meredyth and Mervyn, by the will
Of heaven, were saved amid the wild commotion,
Borne on a plank, tossed by the billow's motion,
Until the dawning of the second day,
When, with an eye all streaming with devotion,
They saw a beam on settling waters play,
Fair as when Eden shone in the sun's infant ray.

Afar upon the ocean's bosom rose
A fairy land in wild magnificence,
Where soon they hoped their miseries to close;
But those alone can know the joys intense,
That warmed their souls and thrilled in every sense,
Who, rescued from a wreck, have trod the shore,
Kissing the rocks from billows a defence,
In unknown woods though savage monsters roar,
So sweet to kneel on land, the watery peril o'er.

Now joy and fear alternate rule the heart,
While sinks the land or peers like floating cloud,
Rises or seems for ever to depart,
Or prosperous breezes sing of hope aloud,
And round the raft the willing billows crowd,
To waft them o'er the waters of the sea,
Or dangers rise their fairest hopes to shroud;
Yet are they still resigned to heaven's decree,
Prepared for all events, whate'er their fate may be.

The veering raft was drifted on the strand,
Where fluted rocks, the handy work of heaven,
Like wrecks of Nature's shrine were seen to stand,
By many a thunderbolt their summits riven,
Their deep foundations to earth's centre driven;
To mock the feeble monuments of man,
They rose when form, at first, to things was given,
To sink with Nature's universal plan.
Long stood the voyagers the wondrous work to scan.

The noblest pillars of Corinthian art,
Of snowy marble glittering in the sun,
Did not unite so nicely nor dispart,
The skill of Doric Master was outdone;
Here was the stone of Paros far outshone
Where Balbec did adore the God of day,
Or where the Olympic victor's prize was won;
No beauty saves the temple from decay,
That shines a few short years to moulder in the clay.

Like form of cloud still varying in the wind,
In land of strangers is the exile's state,
Now entertained as friend with greeting kind,
Now persecuted with a causeless hate,
The proud man's scorn, the sport of ruthless fate,
While recollection seeks a fairer scene,
In infancy where, with a heart elate,
He trod the blooming heath or valley green,
That boyhood's days of bliss and manhood's joys had seen.

Still woman did a welcome kindly give,
Where'er the friendless pair were doomed to roam,
Bidding again the sinking spirit live,
Spurned and rejected at the rich man's dome;
In cabin of the poor they found a home,
Invited warmly to prolong their stay;
And when at last the parting hour was come
They were compelled to tear themselves away,
While all lay locked in sleep, with the first beam of day.

Alas!  no kindness could revive the soul,
Nor heal the inveterate gangrene of the mind;
Though Erin's sons are ready to condole,
In opposition stern, in friendship kind,
In strife impetuous as the stormy wind,
But soon the tempest sinks into a calm,
Light-hearted as the lark, nor left behind,
Wherever generous actions shed their balm,
As mountain eagle brave and gentle as the lamb.

They wandered on their weary pilgrimage,
Seeking a place of rest they no where found,
With fortune doomed a cruel war to wage;
Exiled from all they loved, they roamed around
The hills of Erin to her farthest bound,
When, at the close of a long summer day,
Through shades of eve they heard so sweet a sound,
That it might seem the song of mountain fay,
Or spirit of the wood that sung no earthly lay.

When bounding from the forest like a fawn,
A wreath of thyme and roses round her head,
A female fair as genius of the dawn,
With easy grace adown the mountain sped.
Eve's slanting ray a light on features shed,
In which appeared an air of settled sadness,
Yet with the thoughts by veering fancy bred,
It brightened in a gleam of wildered gladness,
Or sunk again in gloom of melancholy madness.

Again a strain was dying on the ear,
Sweet as the angelic harp that sounds on high,
When sinless childhood dries the suffering tear,
Shining in robes of immortality,
A pure and stainless spirit in the sky.
It was an air of Wales, and Cona's song
That oft delighted her in infancy:
"She comes," they cry, "she quits the heavenly throng,
To light the gloom of woe these dreary wilds among."

The lovely minstrel lightly trod the wild,
Regardless of the strangers, gliding by,
With features so celestial and so mild,
That she might seem a tenant of the sky;
Breathless they traced her with an eager eye,
For Cona's every lineament was there;
Awed by the sight, they watched when she should fly
On pinions of an angel through the air,
To join the heavenly throng in mansions passing fair.

Beside a stream she stooped to cull a flower;
"This planted near his monument," she said,
"And watered by Affection's dewy shower,
A while may bloom in honour of the dead.
Why, Meredyth, by idle terrors led,
Did thy distracted Cona trust the wave?
Oh!  I for ever should have made my bed
On grassy turf, whose verdure wraps thy grave,
Though piercing winds did blow and angry tempests rave.

"Wretch that I am, I broke a parent's heart;
Yes, I who was his solace and his stay,
I planted in his soul a poisoned dart,
The hour from Cambria's shores I fled away&mdash;
O cruel child, unworthy of the day!"
Then copiously her tears began to flow.
Bright as the rain-drops in the sunny ray,
Her cheek was crimsoned with a hectic glow,
Of phrenzy were her cries, and long and wild her woe.

When Meredyth advanced intent to save,
Around her snowy neck his arms to fling,
Frantic she gazed, and rushing from him, gave
A shriek that made the mountain echoes ring,
Flying as 'twere from some unearthly thing;
In a dark wood she vanished from his sight,
Swift as the timid dove from falcon's wing,
Or as the swallow skims the azure light,
When evening's tints of grey are fading into night.

The grove they searched, and called her oft by name,
While "Cona" every whispering rock replied;
Again they called, and yet no Cona came,
But the loved sound enamoured echo sighed,
With hundred tongues, by glen and mountain side;
Long did they call, but still they called in vain,
When through the shady twilight they espied
A bard who sat beside the sounding main,
Prepared to string the lyre to sorrow's plaintive strain.

Mild were their words, the stranger's answer kind:
"Did you behold a lady fair as morn,
In swiftness who outspeeds the mountain hind,
With the deep lines of woe her features worn,
One who in Cambria's golden glens was born;"
"Of such a one there is a mournful tale,"
The bard replied, "she hither came forlorn,
Oft seeks the woody solitudes to wail
O'er joys and sorrows past, while storms of grief assail.

"Hither she sailed in crazy bark alone,
Long tost on ocean by the winds and waves,
A fairer sun had on her fortunes shone,
She of a husband slain in battle raves,
Wild as the storm when winter torrent laves
Our sunless glens; my heart is sad to see
The state of mind from which no watching saves,
The woe and wild excess of misery,
From which nor soothing cares nor medicine's power can free."

"Oh!  bless thee, stranger, heaven be thy reward!
Hast thou e'er felt the parent's pang of woe,
Bereft of only child?  then, gentle bard,
The sorrows of this bosom may'st thou know;
Torn and corroded by the unkindly blow,
A father's fond and doating heart she blest,
O ne'er did filial soul so ardent glow,
Pure as the dew-drop on the cowslip's breast,
And kind as heaven to man by misery opprest."

The sun had sunk beneath the western main,
The silver moon on wood and ocean smiled,
Whitening the grassy mantle of the plain,
The eddying gulf where restless waters boiled,
And foliage green and honey-suckle coiled
Around the willow-tree, where oft was heard
The sound of Erin's harp so sweet and wild,
Awaked to night-hymn by that aged bard,
To sooth a kindred grief, the poet's best reward.

They wandered onward till the noon of night;
When to the verge of precipice advanced,
They saw the form of female in the light,
A paly ray on ghastly features glanced;
Into the wave she plunged!  the moonbeams danced
Like living pearls upon the breast of ocean;
The frantic husband flew like arrow lanced
From bow of steel, so rapid was his motion,
The Druid sunk on earth immersed in deep devotion.

Rushed Meredyth into the swelling tide,
Swift as a sea-bird cuts the yielding wave;
Long was the way, but danger he defied,
His heart's lost treasure resolute to save,
Or perish with her deep in ocean's cave;
Thrice she emerged and sunk to rise no more,
Till sound of angel trumpet summons gave,
Had not her lord been destined to restore
His soul's delight from death, and bear her to the shore.

He dived like cormorant in quest of prey,
Hid by the billow for so long a space,
That deep despondency began to sway
The father's fainting heart, nor could he trace
Aught but the moonbeam on the water's face,
When Meredyth above the surge appeared,
With Cona in one arm in close embrace,
And travelling o'er the wave, with the other steered
His voyage to the shore, which joyfully he neared.

With dripping locks she lies upon the sand,
Still as the soul on ether's wings had fled;
Beside her Meredyth and Mervyn stand,
Mourning as she were numbered with the dead;
The star of hope no consolation shed;
The minstrel broke the silence with his sighs;
Than this, ah!  never was a pause more dread,
When, starting up, she wildly roll'd her eyes,
Filling the rocky shore with lamentable cries.

"Oh!  where am I?  Yes, yes, I know it well,
Yes, ye are fiends, the ministers of woe,
Prepared for aye to torture me in hell;
I hear the shrieking of the damned below,
I am no wicked one, oh!  let me go;
Alas!  that glance will change me into stone,
I cannot bear it, spare, oh!  spare that blow,
A hundred fiends on one poor wretch alone,
Oh!  fie, it is not well, I'm lost, undone, undone!"

They led her to the cabin of the bard,
The echoing air by cries of woe was rent,
The promontories shrieks of phrenzy heard,
That o'er the wave with doleful sound was sent;
As angels guard the good with kind intent,
They watched beside the couch of misery,
Yet eye of vigilance could not invent
A healing balm for her calamity,
Nor light again the ray of weak humanity.

Yet was she sometimes calm, and fancies strange
Would flit across the darkness of her brain,
That all at once, by a celestial change,
She was a fay or mermaid of the main;
While she would nightly chaunt as sweet a strain
As e'er was rung along the moon-light seas,
Amid the revels of the fairy train,
Or from the flower-cup of the blossomed trees,
When viewless harp is heard the sprites of air to please.

Again a ray of intellectual dawn
Would shine in promise of return of light,
From the benighted mind that had withdrawn
That might to reason's eye restore the sight;
Then would she view them with a smile so bright
As blessed their hearts, and say that once she knew
Two such, and that it did her soul delight
The features and the form again to view,
That bore similitude to them so just and true.

Then would she with a faithful pencil trace
The form and majesty of Meredyth,
The eye, the features, and the manly grace
That beauty's radiance shed around his path,
The intellect, the light of Clwyd's strath;
Then starting from her pillow, would she cry,
"For mercy's sake, avert the murderer's wrath!
Wipe off those drops his neck of snow that dye&mdash;
See!  death is on his cheek, cold brow, and starless eye."

Now did she, vexed as by a demon, wound
Her cheek divested of the rose's glow,
Or cast her tender form upon the ground,
Or on the winds her golden tresses throw,
A fearful monument of human woe!
Now did she on a weeping husband fly,
With hidden weapon aim a deadly blow,
Yelling aloud in wild convulsive cry,
To ruth might move the rocks, wild woods, and stormy sky.

Thus rolled the hours in thickest cloud of sorrow,
The sun of morning never pierced the gloom,
The night of woe looked to a darker morrow,
Nor did the winter hope the vernal bloom
Would strew the scene with flowers of sweet perfume.
When mind on Cona's cheek began to play,
And reason seemed the empire to resume,
Still was it but a darkling twilight ray,
That might foretell the storm, or fair and sunny day.

"Ye come, ye come," she cried, in gentle ruth,
"Ye spirits of my kindred now I see,
In heavenly garb and renovated youth,
From seats of bliss and love to solace me,
To waft my soul from galling fetters free,
On pinions of the morning through the sky,
To sip the dews of life's ambrosial tree,
To wreathe my harp with flowers that bloom on high,
Waking the glorious strains of immortality."

A stream of glory played around her brow,
She seemed no more a tenant of the earth,
The feelings of an Angel laboured now
Within her swelling bosom for a birth;
She gazed and stretched her right hand feebly forth,
While sense was wakened to reality,
And, shining in the light of native worth,
She knew the lord of her idolatry,
Nor longer did she doubt the mind's fidelity.

"Oh!  Meredyth, where, where am I," she cried,
For long my life has been a fearful dream;
Are ye of earth, or to the heavens allied,
My love!  my life!  oh!  are ye what ye seem!"
Her eyes were moist with Nature's kindly stream,
Then with a bound she sprung into his arms,
"Oh!  heaven has pleased to gild life's setting beam!
I die, but in the brightness of thy charms
No sorrow clouds my hopes, no fear my heart alarms."

They mingle tear with tear and sigh with sigh,
Drinking of love's delicious ecstacy;
The light of soul is kindling in the eye,
Fairer from fortune's recent cruelty;
They yield themselves to joy's supremacy,
Nor think the dart of death is on the wing,
That soon, alas!  by Nature's fixed decree,
Must to their bliss a termination bring,
Giving to agony affection's ties to wring.

But soon the rapture sinks into a calm,
No more the feeble frame can undergo;
In accents softer than the Indian balm,
The Druid tells his wanderings and his woe,
And while he speaks, the tears in torrents flow
From eye of Cona borrowing light from heaven,
Brighter from sorrow's sympathetic glow,
Than when her troth to Meredyth was given,
Shining in bridal robe on Hymeneal even.

"Thy woes with keener anguish pierce my heart,
Than all the sorrows fortune ever gave;
And Oh!  my father!  I have had my part,
Horrors from which no human power could save!
For ages hung upon the stormy wave,
Cut off from face of heaven and bloom of spring,
To dwell with vampyres in earth's central cave,
Or whirled upon the arctic's tempest's wing,
Around the polar star in everlasting ring;

"Or pent in sepulchre among the dead,
Where sun or starlight never shed a ray,
But flames that bickered through the gloom instead,
From eyeless sockets shot a hideous day,
The damp my drink, my coverlet the clay!
I could not die, yet life was conscious death,
The reptiles of my bosom made their prey,
And fires consumed me, lighted by the breath
Of ghosts that fluttered round, the ministers of wrath.

"But oh!  how changed the scene!  for now I see
A host of angels flitting to and fro,
To heaven on wings of love to carry me,
In streams around the throne of God that flow,
To drink oblivion of my earthly woe,
And bathe in bliss by mortal man untried:
In mantle of eternity to glow,
To fount of unextinguished light allied:"
She spoke, and on her lips the words in murmurs died.

The spirit, to its home in heaven, had fled;
Still was her cheek illumined by a smile
Of calm delight, in which was plainly read
The promise of immortal life the while,
To sooth a parent's woe and grief beguile;
It shone like sun of evening's lingering ray,
That goes to carry light to distant isle,
But still with twilight gilds the western way,
To tell the world he burns to bring another day.

"Is fate combined with man to ruin me!"
In hopeless agony the husband cried;
"Oh!  Cona, have I found thee but to see
My bosom's angel perish by my side!
Do gods the woes of wretched man deride!"
My son, be thy impiety forgiven!
With chastened grief, the Druid calm replied;
"Art thou so far from path of duty driven,
As rashly to arraign the righteous will of heaven?

"Ah!  knowest thou not man's joys are like a dream,
From the fond grasp the promised pleasures fly,
Delusive as the morning's golden beam,
Like streamless channel to the pilgrim's eye,
Who faint and weary sighs and passes by.
But oh!  my son!  there is a place of rest,
A fair and peaceful mansion in the sky,
A strong defence, a fortress to the opprest,
The houseless exile's home, where all the good are blest."
