While silent ages glide away,
And turrets tremble with decay,
Let not the pensive Muse disdain
The tribute of one humble strain,
To mourn in plaints of pity due
The fate of yonder blasted YEW.

Long blotted from the rolls of time
The day that mark'd thy early prime,
No hoary sage remains to say
Who kindly rear'd thy tender spray;
Who taught its slow-maturing form
From age to age to brave the storm.

Beneath thy widely branching shade
Perchance his weary limbs were laid,
Content, without a stone &mdash; to share
The umbrage of thy grateful care;
His utmost wish for thee to shed
Oblivion's dews around his head.

And long thy darkling foliage gave
A hallowed stillness to his grave;
For there &mdash; if legends rightly tell,
No vagrant reptile dar'd to dwell:
Even sprights, by moonlight wont to stray,
Scar'd at thy presence fled away.

As thus, in contemplative mood
The venerable trunk I view'd,
Forth issuing from the sapless rind
A hoarse voice trembled on the wind.
Amaz'd I stood:  and wing'd with fear
These accents caught my wondering ear.

"Me to the precincts of the place,
That antique hallowed Pile to grace,
From native woods, in days of yore,
The fathers of the hamlet bore:
Foster'd by Superstition's hand,
A late memorial now I stand.

"My spreading shade extending wide,
The village wonder, and its pride,
I mark'd as years revolv'd, the blow
That laid thy hardiest grandsires low.
Now, worn with all-consuming age,
I yield to Time's relentless rage.

"Nor fondly blame, with strain severe,
The simple zeal that plac'd me here;
Nor dare thy fathers to despise,
And deem their upstart sons more wise:
Let self-conviction check thy pride
To error both too near allied.

"Of zeal's unletter'd warmth possest,
Yet still, Religion fir'd their breast;
Frequent the hallowed court to tread,
Where Mercy hears Repentance plead;
Constant the grateful hymn to raise.
Our Zion echoed with their praise.

"Their sons superior knowledge boast!
Knowledge how vain!  since zeal is lost.
Now gradual, as my branches pine,
I see Devotion's flame decline.
And while, like me, RELIGION wanes,
Alas!  her vestige scarce remains."
