SCENE &mdash; A COUNTRY CHURCH-YARD.
TRAVELLER &mdash; VILLAGER.

TRAVELLER.
Beneath this quivering Pine's uncertain shade
Methinks unwonted verdure decks the mound,
And every simple wild flower has display'd
Its loveliest hues, and sheds its fragrance round:
And lo!  a stone just peeping from the ground
Silver'd with moss its venerable head,
Denotes the neighbouring mansion of the dead.

Say, VILLAGER!  what mortal moulders here,
Beneath the heaving turf's perpetual green?
Less envied far, in humid vault and drear
Imprison'd sleep the sons of pride, I ween,
Than thus, beneath the ethereal arch serene,
Where, whispering soft, the tall Pine seems to wave
In guardian semblance, o'er the hallowed grave.

VILLAGER.
STRANGER!  by chance or holy purpose led
Where consecrated bounds these guests inclose
Sleeping in still seclusion, gently tread,
Nor violate thine ancient friend's repose:
For still her name the rude, brief legend shows,
Ere-while to many a weary traveller known;
Read then (for thou canst read) the sculptur'd stone.

TRAVELLER.
Ah!  well I mark the name to pilgrims dear
As to the withering herbage genial rain;
Of gentlest manners, and of heart sincere,
In happier times the friend of all was JANE,
Her home the haunt of every village swain,
Not there, for riot met the rustic band;
Toil sought relief, and Friendship converse bland.

As near her board, with foaming honours crown'd,
Engag'd in social chat or sage debate,
Passing their glass of sparkling liquor round,
The politicians of the hamlet sate,
How wisely they retriev'd the sinking state!
Held the long parley!  wing'd the pointed jest!
While boisterous Mirth his loud applause express'd.

There paus'd the wandering Jew:  the patient Scot
Belated there unbound his cumbrous load
Far borne and painful: &mdash; each his toils forgot,
As each her hospitable threshold trod:
In sooth, it was meek Courtesy's abode;
Told but the woe-begone his tale of grief,
And ne'er aid JANE withhold the prompt relief.

VILLAGER.
Aye &mdash; many a mortal of the vagrant train
Wilder'd by night, with weariness opprest,
When howl'd the wind, when heat the driving rain,
Found unbought shelter there, refreshment, rest.
She ever lov'd to succour the distrest,
Condemn'd by friendless penury to rove,
Or stern mishap, or ill-requited love.

And when poor Robin, herald of the year,
Proclaim'd the glad approach of festal day,
Shrovetide, or Easter, Wake, or busy Fair,
What HOSTESS hast than seen like her, display
Each culinary vase in bright array?
What dainties vied with her's to allure the taste?
Who spoke so kind a welcome to the feast?

But chiefly ere the dawn when angels told
To wondering shepherds a Redeemer born,
Lustrations pure and rites ordain'd of old,
Conspir'd her simple mansion to adorn:
Then rural neatness usher'd in the morn
With bays and holly, and immortal yew,
Of Heaven's unfading bliss the emblem true.

Fail'd not to assemble there our choral throng,
With minstrelsy attun'd to holy rhyme,
Chaunting as festive joy inspir'd the song,
Each psalm and carol sacred to the time:
There maidens fair, and swains in youthful prime,
As love inspir'd, and music's thrilling sound,
Join'd the gay dance, with many a whirl and bound.

There too, in martial guise and rustic phrase,
The stripling mimic tales of terror told,
Stalking in arms grotesque and vizard face,
As erst Saint George and other champions bold:
How hardy Jack the Giant's might controll'd,
How courteous knight reliev'd the Fair distrest;
Till kindred ardour fir'd each youthful breast.

Oft have I heard the pageant train rehearse
Harsh sounding names, and deeds of glory done,
And tell in many a legendary verse
Of dragons vanquish'd and of battles won.
And lo!  the dire encounter is begun,
See the proud victor spurn the prostrate slain,
And see the vanquish'd rise to fight again.

Oft near her cheerful hearth the wily dame
Expert in secrets deep and Fortune's lore;
To listening maids would solve some mystic dream,
Or in the tell-tale hand their loves explore;
Such were our artless joys in days of yore,
Ere vanish'd at suspicion's dark controul
Nature's prime grace, simplicity of soul.

TRAVELLER.
Kind SWAIN!  I mingle my regrets with thine,
But haste forbids my feet to linger here:
Thee too thy rustic labour calls, &mdash; be mine
Dropping o'er this lone grave the pitying tear,
To urge on my way, now shelterless and drear;
We mortals are but pilgrims of a day,
Here we just step and rest:  then pass away:

Short is our stage; and transient is the date
To man assign'd his wilder'd race to run:
But who can tell, in this eventful state
What sorrows shall obscure his setting sun,
And dim the hours in cloudless morn begun!
Life's faithless joys what gathering ills deform!
How oft on sunshine waits the inclement storm!

VILLAGER.
Farewell!  but hear:  On her declining age,
Misfortune frown'd, nor merit's self could save,
Misery's keen pang neglectful to assuage,
Cold CHARITY prepar'd her scanty grave.
Not such the dole, her warm compassions gave,
Ere freezing want the generous wish repress'd;
And check'd the sigh that labour'd in her breast.

But yet if virtue claim the willing song;
If honest praise on rural worth await;
Aye, yet, &mdash; full oft the list'ning youths among,
Shall many a hoary swain lament her fate
And as this path he treads in pensive state,
Sigh o'er her name, and halcyon days of yore,
Till busy memory sleeps to wake no more.
