TRAVELLER, thou know'st where WINWICK'S temple stands,
And proudly lifts its spiry top in air;
The lofty site a prospect wide commands,
And its gilt honours glitter from afar.

Pleas'd with the sweet seclusion of the place,
In days of yore, as mouldering records tell,
Those rural haunts a MONARCH lov'd to trace,
And there apart from grandeur, deign'd to dwell.

Fast by its walls, beneath a yew-tree's shade,
Where a low stone its humble head uprears,
He lies, whose NOD my timid youth obey'd,
Who for the Muses form'd my earliest years.

Firm fix'd upon a rock's projecting brow,
The Village SCHOOL defied the shock of time;
Fancy depicts its cherish'd image now,
Delighted to retrace the scenes of prime.

There, while the tardy hours their circles ran,
Impatient childhood sate, compell'd to pore
On ling'ring tasks that with the dawn began,
And conn'd the ungrateful lesson o'er and o'er.

Hard fate!  when scarcely from the sullied page
The curious eye a moment dar'd to stray;
Nor from the oaken bench, embrown'd with age,
The nimble foot might prove its light essay:

When on the silence scarce a whisper broke,
A kindred thought of pleasure to excite;
Nor, unrestrain'd by Terror, Fancy spoke,
The fond idea of appall'd delight:

Save that the unpleasing hum of sad constraint
With sameness echoed through the mansion drear;
And ever and anon, the piteous plaint
Of smarting dullness smote the list'ning ear.

For ah!  a wight he was whose very frown,
With timid awe each wayward thought represt;
And when he spoke, the authoritative tone
Awoke to terror each discordant breast.

Exalted high upon imperial chair,
He rul'd the assembly with despotic sway;
His scanty praise 'twas glory's self to share,
His wrathful accents widely spread dismay.

'Twas thence his glance each lurking corner try'd,
Suspicion's self sate brooding in his eye;
Where might the self-convicted truant hide!
How frame, to meet his ear the evasive lie!

In vain the stammering accent would conceal
The hurried task, by negligence prepared;
Nor suppliant looks, nor artful tears avail,
Vindictive stripes from sluggard backs to ward.

With stern convulsive grasp, his forceful hand
The culprit seiz'd, while cries his terror spoke:
Nor idly fell the unrelenting wand,
As shrinking instinct writh'd to shun the stroke.

What anguish keen from young sensation flows,
Full well my youthful feelings could attest;
But short-liv'd is the grief that Nature knows,
When life's young tide invigorates the breast.

HAIL, happy days!  when sorrow soonest finds,
In swift forgetfulness a kind relief;
When quick transition soothes the vacant mind,
And liveliest joy succeeds to keenest grief!

Ah!  could my ripn'd fancy still efface
From memory's brazen page each mournful scene;
With lighter hand the lines of pleasure trace,
Nor dwell on tales of woe that intervene!

Full oft again she'd join the sportive throng,
Haunt the gay mead, the fragrant breeze inhale,
Explore the mossy nest, the brakes among,
Or in the race outstrip the flying gale!

Again, with youthful eagerness, partake
The buxom joys that innocence bestows,
With morning suns to dreams of pleasure wake,
And sink with eve to undisturb'd repose.
