Ah!  why does man convert the garden fair,
Stored with ambrosial sweets for his delight,
Into a wilderness of woe and care,
A charnel house to terrify the sight!
Ah!  why with withering mildew does he blight
The olive bough; why cloud the lovely star
That burns in firmament of peace so bright;
The song of hope and joy why does he mar
By jarring sound of trump and frantic cries of war!

O!  let the prince who slips the hounds of war,
Stretched on the bed of down himself, conceive
The loud lament of woe that sounds afar
From battle-field, beneath the star of eve,
The widow's and the orphan's tears, who grieve
For a loved parent or a husband slain,
The sorrows of the captive train who leave,
In iron fetters bound, their native plain;
Oh!  let him ponder these, nor whet the sword again.

In sable weeds the sun of morning rose
To light the obsequies of liberty;
Dread was the work of death till evening close,
When Cambria's vallies wept in slavery,
And every silver stream that sought the sea
Rolled melancholy music to the shore;
The star of Freedom set by heaven's decree,
In blood of patriot quenched to shine no more,
On green of wizard glen or cliff of mountain hoar.

While every lonely rock and sylvan cave
On the hill slope, or in the vale below,
Was wet with tears of beauty for the brave,
Upon the field of valour lying low,
And echoed to the mother's shriek of woe,
The cries of widowhood that rose to heaven,
The infant's wail, the thundering tread of foe
Who rushed destructive as the burning levin,
On unresisting hosts like flocks to slaughter driven.

Oh!  might my feeble song transmit to fame,
The splendid acts that day for freedom done,
Snatching from dark oblivion's gulf the name
Of all the brave who glory's garland won!
For ne'er did light of valour, like the sun,
Halo the warrior's plume with fairer rays,
Nor o'er again, while rolling ages run,
Shall independence burn with brighter blaze
To animate mankind, and fire the latter days.

Strong was the arm of Meredyth the while,
And, had the fates allowed the land to save,
He might have stood the bulwark of the isle,
Like rock that ocean's swelling waters lave;
Fierce as the storm, when foeman crushed the brave,
He charged his ranks and saw the victor yield,
Stemming with might the battle's raging wave
That swept his kindred warriors from the field,
Long did his hand sustain his country's covering shield.

Thrice did the puissance of the son arrest,
By rapid stroke that like the lightning fell,
The weapon levelled at a parent's breast;
Thrice did he bear him through the battle's swell,
But ah!  what language may his sorrows tell,
When from a deadly bow an arrow came
That pierced a father's heart, who lifeless fell!
No tear he shed, swift vengeance was his aim,
That in his bosom raged like a devouring flame.

Like hurricane along the field he flew,
And, to his father's venerable shade
A sacrifice, twice twenty warriors slew,
Who sunk beneath the thunder of his blade;
Alone he waged the war, nor needed aid;
He rent the foe as lion rends a fawn;
The effort was the last that freedom made,
When he had ceased his kindred were withdrawn,
His soul was dark as night, and hoped no ray of dawn.

A wilderness of death around him lay,
The field of battle was a cemetry,
Those eyes were closed that at the break of day
Beamed with a confidence of victory;
Marred in the bloom was Cambria's chivalry,
Fast from his eye-lids fell the bitter tear,
In anguish on the grave of liberty;
'Twas stillness all, nor friend nor foe was near
To sooth his sorrowing soul, or thrill his heart with fear.

He slowly from the scene of blood withdrew,
Seeking the shelter of a neighbouring grove,
Heaving a burning sigh to nature due,
To kindred slain, to country and to love;
A host of passions in his bosom strove,
The retrospect of horror fired his brain,
The finger of anticipation wove
A tissue-work of wretchedness and pain,
In which were figured ills of darker, deadlier grains

Soon fancy yielded to reality,
The yells of murder rung from every hill,
In every valley's deep concavity,
The life of infant died the limpid rill;
Thick as the liquid gems of dew distil,
With ruddy drops the heather was distained,
Red ran the torrent at the victor's will,
Who heeded not the voice that feebly plained,
Lopping the gallant arm that still the war maintained

In Clwyd's vale long ere the morning dawn,
The work of desolation was begun;
From the hill cot, and hamlet of the lawn,
Whatever way the helpless tenant run
To call for aid, he was alike undone;
The flames behind, the levelled spears before,
Barred all access; the mother and the son
Fell by one wound; the rivers to the shore
Rolled waves of patriot blood to dye the waters hoar.

Now morning oped the portals of the sky,
Crowned with a wreath of roses gemm'd with dew,
In fleecy mantle of the purple dye,
And burnished buskins of the scarlet hue,
Hanging with crimson clouds the orient blue;
The genii of the dawn her pennon bore,
Around on sportive wing the breezes flew,
While heavenward Cona's thoughts began to soar,
Hymning her matin song the Eternal to adore.

As yet she knew not of her country's woes,
No hostile footstep to her bower was led,
For Meredyth the prayer of fervour rose,
That in the hour of danger heaven would shed
The light of life around a husband's head;
The Druid rushing, pale and trembling cried,
"Ill, ill, my daughter, have thy wishes sped!
Our hopes are wrecked on battle's bloody tide,
Go save thyself by flight, in mountain cavern hide."

Frantic she cried, "Is Meredyth no more?
"From these loved groves oh ask me not to fly,
Where, as we wandered in the days of yore,
He was the star of safety to my eye;
I care not what may hap if he is nigh,
Shielded by him I would the battle dare,
Prepared with him to live, with him to die,
And mingling with his spirit wing the air,
The joys of a sweet land of peace and rest to share."

The Druid eyed her with a look of love,
In which compassion mingled with surprise,
As saints in perfect blessedness above
Look down on erring mortals from the skies:
"Ah!  thinks my child what she demands?" he cries,
Expect not to gainsay the will of fate!
Around the grove the impious foeman flies
The residence of gods to violate&mdash;
Oh!  much I fear the times foretold of ancient date.

"Dost thou not see afar the glare of hell!
These torches bear a sacrilegious fire,
The shouts that ring aloud are Freedom's knell,
From Cambria's palaces the flames aspire.
Oh!  this has been a night of visions dire!
Cona!  thy hopes for Meredyth are vain,
But, rising fairer from the funeral pyre,
We all in happier climes shall meet again,
Where widows cease to weep and patriots to complain."

"Oh!  is my sun of joy for ever set,
No more to shed a vivifying beam,
And am I doomed, by enemies beset,
To drink for aye of sorrow's bitter stream!
Oh!  could my blood from death his life redeem!
But do not say his bloom is in the dust,
My brain's on fire, oh!  do I wake or dream!
He lives, he lives!  he placed in heaven his trust,
Virtue availeth not if heaven forsake the just."

"My child!  thy sorrows will not wake the dead,
Or if thou weep, thy country claims the tear;
Immortal glory gilds the warrior's head.
But fly, oh, fly!  even now the foes appear,
Prepared for deeds of death, in front and rear,
On thy fair form to lay a ruffian hand,
While not a friend is nigh thy heart to cheer,
To bear thee captive to a foreign land,
And mock thy silent griefs on a far distant strand."

Sudden the mourner sunk in deadly swoon,
And void of motion as a statue lay
From morning till the day had gained the noon;
Through the thick wood the invader cut his way,
Making the venerable oak his prey,
Doomed to descend in majesty of years
Beneath the conflagration's impious sway;
For ages watered by heaven's holy tears,
Oft as the rosy morn, or grey-eyed eve, appears.

Dread was the conflict in the final hour,
To guard from foot profane the sacred grove;
When leagued with residue of Albion's power,
Their souls inspired with courage from above,
Even tottering age and tender boyhood strove
The last recess of freedom to defend;
And sisters dared, led by their country's love,
In the fair strife with brothers to contend,
And in the sacred cause the last of life to spend.

No valour could arrest the stroke of fate,
The Ausonian scaled the rampart of the dead,
Aroused to fury gave a scope to hate;
By fell revenge and deadly rancour led,
With blaze of fire-brand desolation spread;
The flames were rolling like the surging sea,
And overtopped the tallest mountain's head;
Then sunk the ancient oak and liberty,
The temple of the gods, the seats of piety.

Ah!  who the throes of Mervyn's soul may speak,
When fires began to rage around his head!
A tear of nameless anguish stained his cheek,
That Nature's fountain dried, the last he shed;
Speechless he stood, his limbs did shake with dread,
As if the golden orb that gilds the day,
From the fair chambers of the morning fled,
And the green earth and planets lost their stay,
And Nature's mighty frame like vapour passed away.

Amid the uproar wild the sleeper woke;
Her heart was broken, wildered was her brain,
Frantic she shrieked, in hollow murmurs spoke,
And on the wings of terror fled amain
Along the grove, the mountain and the plain.
Wild were her thoughts, she wist not where she went,
Nor rested till she reached the billowy main,
Then sat her on a rock without intent,
Eyeing with vacant gaze the watery firmament.

Of gloomy import was her revery,
As with a tearless eye she viewed the wave,
Longing to lose the sense of misery,
Amid the sunless mansions of the grave,
Beneath the rolling tide in ocean's cave;
Then heard she in the whistling of the wind,
That now along the sky began to rave,
The murderers of Meredyth behind!
Quenched was the etherial beam, the light that guides the mind.

Alas!  no fancied sounds assailed her ear.
She looked around, the hills were red with flame;
Along the sands she fled, impelled by fear;
Borne on the water, moans of murder came,
Shaking by terror's fits her gentle frame.
Within the bosom of a little bay,
So sheltered that the tempest there was tame,
She seized a coracle on shore that lay,
And bore with sail and oar fast from the land away.

Be hushed, ye waves, that heave the little bark,
Less cruel than the fiends that waste on shore;
Ye storms, that irritate the waters dark,
Spare helpless innocence, and cease to roar;
Ye breezes, that succeed, the tempest o'er,
Oh waft the mourner to a place of rest,
To meet her kindred and to weep no more,
In kind affections and in virtue blest,
The summer of the soul, no winter to molest!

The winds in wrath were driving through the sky,
Rocked rudely on the surge the vessel hung;
But Cona minded not the danger nigh,
Wildly by starts she wept, or laughed, or sung,
While Meredyth was ever on her tongue,
And Mervyn's name resounded o'er the main;
Around her head the mountain-wave was flung,
But did not cool the fever of her brain,
Now raved she like the storm, then calmly sunk again.

Bursting the gloom a lovelier beam returned,
The ocean was a glorious sight to see,
That in the sun like golden mirror burned,
Shining in Cona's eye resplendently;
The while she sweetly sung a lullaby,
Of power to charm the nymphs in coral cave,
A strain of Nature's simple melody,
Might draw from emerald hall the nymphs that lave
Their limbs and sea-green locks in fount of cooling wave.

Now shone the midnight moon with ray serene,
And every orbit oped its golden eye,
On pearly waves the vessel might be seen,
Most like a silver cloudlet in the sky.
Whoso should hear the plaintive minstrelsy,
That sounded o'er the deep like heavenly lay,
Might deem some angel left his seats on high
To cheer the sailor on his trackless way,
In pity of his state, till the return of day.

With dawn a ridge of hills began to rise,
Where tints of gold were mingling with the green,
The tops of forms fantastic cut the skies,
A sweeter land on ocean is not seen;
And here and there a little isle between,
Like a fair gem upon the waters lay;
It was a sight of joy, a fairy scene,
That sorrow from the heart might chase away,
And on the gloomy soul shed a sweet beam of day.

But Cona gazed as if she saw it not,
Save when the opening head-lands called to mind
Her present wretchedness and happier lot;
But all her thoughts were shifting as the wind,
For now she fancied Meredyth to find
In the lone bosom of sequestered vale
On Clwyd's banks, as when the fates were kind;
Then recollection waked to weep and wail,
The while the breezes blew and swelled the little sail.

Swift as a cloud before the racking wind,
Over the foam-bell'd wave the vessel flew,
Leaving in speed the cormorant behind;
With tiny prow she brushed the ocean dew,
And to the shore with steady motion drew,
And soon was fixed among the golden sand.
Wilds of enchantment oped on Cona's view,
That shone like Paradise or Cambria's land;
Then sprung she from the bark, and stood on Erin's strand.

Beneath the sun, oh what a goodly sight,
Appears the watery pilgrimage to close;
Blue lake and forest glittering in the light,
Bright streamlet that with limpid water flows,
Wild mountain flowered with heath, and vale that glows
In fairer hues than Indian summers boast,
The green-haired oak, the pine, the golden rose,
The cataract in whitening torrents tost,
The vista that retires in maze of beauty lost.

Oh with what joy had Cona hailed the scene
To guide her steps had Meredyth been there,
Along the winding rill of silver sheen,
Through the wild wood, green glen, and valley fair,
To breathe the incense of the balmy air!
For ne'er with more delight did votary eye
The exhaustless charms of nature, void of care;
But beauty of the earth, and sea and sky,
Seems a bleak wilderness when lights of reason die.

No sandals braced her ancles wet with brine,
Loose were her ringlets and her bosom bare;
Yet might she seem a nymph of form divine,
For beauty shone amid her wildered air.
But had the friends of former years been there,
Oh how would they have mourned her altered state
The wrecks of mind no seasons can repair,
The intellectual ruin wrought by fate,
By destiny of heaven and rancorous foeman's hate.

Alas!  that mind, a spark of heavenly fire,
Should be so dimm'd by gloom of misery,
So led by meteor lights as to desire
Fancy's creations for reality;
That, nursed in lap of fair Felicity,
The victim should prefer to face of friend
The wildness of the mountain scenery,
While winter winds blow chill and snows descend,
And the loud tempest's gales the troubled welkin rend.

Now Cona wanders 'mong the tangling brake,
Her food the berries of the wild supply,
Her thirst the waters of the fountain slake;
Dim are the pictures of her memory,
Things past confounded with the present lie,
On the distorted image of the brain;
Alone the echoes answer to her cry
Of Meredyth, yet calls she oft in vain,
Unconscious of her state and heedless of her pain.

At twilight hour she chanced to hear such strains
As in her happier days the love-toned lute
Was wont to sound on Cambria's pleasant plains,
In notes that mirth or melancholy suit.
She was entranced by joy, &mdash; the air was mute;
"Oh!  gentle spirit, once again that lay!"
She cried, "forsake me not in sad pursuit!
Thy voice as soon as heard has died away.
Ah cruel, leave me not!  my love, for pity stay!"

The weary mourner thought it was the shade
Of Meredyth, that left the seats on high
To watch her lonely wanderings in the glade;
Again she deemed that she herself did fly
Through the fair land of spirits in the sky:
When issuing from the wood she spied a bard;
The fire was unextinguished in his eye,
Though by the lines of age his face was marr'd,
A harp hung by his side, his solace and reward.

The maniac with a momentary gleam
Of joy was listening to her native tongue,
Yet joy was but the phantom of a dream;
A while she on the stranger's accents hung,
Then swiftly, like a beauteous vision, flung
Through a dark wood impervious to the day,
And on the verge of silver fountain sung,
In wildest notes, a mountain roundelay;
The harp began to swell in answer to her lay.

Lightly again she glided from the grove,
Surveyed the aged man with curious eye;
He beckoned with benignity and love, 
While she advanced and offered not to fly,
But was conducted to an arbour nigh;
The stranger had the Druid's mien and air,
His silver locks, his gait and eagle eye:
She was delighted by his greeting fair,
And joyfully received a benefactor's care.

Fatigue and sorrow laid the mourner low,
A fiery fever in her pulses reigned,
Of deadly symptom from excess of woe;
Beside the bed of pain the sire remained;
To watch her varying wants when she complained,
For he was deeply skilled in Nature's lore,
An intercourse of mystery maintained
With gentle fays that love to hover o'er
The pillow of disease, and bloom of health restore.

He knew the balm of every herb and flower
That blossoms by the mountain and the vale,
And every secret influence of power
By bounteous heaven permitted to prevail
Over the various ills that life assail;
But long she hung suspended o'er the grave,
No root nor balmy essence could avail
From force of the consuming fire to save,
Nor to the minstrel hope nor consolation gave.

This son of Erin, tenant of the wild,
Watered the couch of woe with many a tear,
As if the sufferer were his only child,
And tended her with bosom racked by fear;
To Nature's feelings true, to Mercy dear,
The minstrels still have been a gentle race,
That love the sorrows of mankind to cheer,
The pilgrim of the desert to embrace,
In bond of brotherhood, with frank and easy grace.

Three moons had waned ere hope began to dawn,
Still life hung trembling on the verge of fate,
Now giving joy, in darkness now withdrawn,
Now lighting, now o'ershadowing her state;
But when it whispered of a longer date,
She seemed like one just risen from the tomb,
The secrets of death's empire to relate;
Her cheek no more regained the rose's bloom,
And reason's star had set in everlasting gloom.

Alas!  how changed by sorrow since the day
On which she gave to Meredyth her hand,
When she was blooming like the morning ray,
The loveliest of the fair in Cambria's land;
Now veering was her state, now mild and bland,
Now like the tempest was she seen to rave,
Rushing to rock o'erhanging ocean's strand,
And had not Erin's maids been there to save,
The victim of despair had perished in the wave.

But soon she sunk in melancholy sadness,
As harmless as the ways of infancy,
Nor longer was a prey to stormy madness,
But loved to sit beneath a shady tree,
To sing some wildly warbled melody,
Acting the sports of childhood o'er again;
And oft she called on Meredyth to see
The garland she had wove of flowery chain,
Blending the song of love with music of the main.

She loved to vie with children in the race,
In all the warmth of wild simplicity,
And, flushed by exercise, regained the grace
That shone so sweetly on her infancy;
Irene loved her for her minstrelsy,
The land of liberty, the land of song,
The generous heroes' fruitful nursery,
At freedom's voice to glory's lists who throng,
Fanning the sacred fire romantic groves among.

