Midnight had flung her shadows o'er the world,
And Sleep, his fetters on the human soul:
Around the mountain peaks moist vapours curled,
While from the lifeless regions of the pole
Silence assumed her undisturbed control.
The owl on ponderous pinion traced his way,
And to the woods poured forth his dismal dole;
The feathered tribes were mute on every spray,
As 'neath the fireless hearth the night-fly chirped his lay.

The mustering winds swept through the troubled air,
And waked at length the startled ear of night;
The hungry jackal left his bloody lair,
And skulked abroad beneath the stars' pale light,
To glut on carrion flesh his appetite.
By fits the ban-dog bayed the rising moon,
Forth the freebooter prowled, in murderous plight;
The dire musquito hummed his drowsy tune,
And on the sleeping wight bestowed his smarting boon.

Oh!  what a sad and fearful thing to see
The gloom &mdash; to mark the stillness of that hour,
When nature wears death's awful livery,
And counterfeits his awe-awakening power!
When darkness steals its fragrance from the flower,
And hides its varied charms from mortal sight,
Wan superstition quits her goblin tower,
While phantoms dire accompany her flight,
Adding new terrors to the gloomy reign of night.

Hers are the hours when dread remorse is heard,
And to the conscience thunders its decrees;
When thought, by passion now no longer stirred,
Retires, and drains from sorrow's bitter lees
Their last wrung drop of gall:  then quickly freeze
Those blander feelings which the heart kept warm
Ere wrongs had chilled them; then the mind's disease
Gains fearful nurture &mdash; nor has sleep a charm,
When the vexed soul is stung, to hush its wild alarm.

This is the time when o'er the slumbering soul
Of Nature hangs a cloud; she seems to mourn
Her light departed:  clad in sorrow's stole,
She wears it till the truant day's return.
Like a maid weeping o'er her lover's urn,&mdash;
No more the smile of beauty lights her eye,
But on their lids the feverish tear-drops burn
So Nature, in her night, appears to lie,
Bereft of all her charms &mdash; a type of misery.

Now is the reign of solitary woe:
The hoary anchorite his vigil keeps;
The Caenobite endures the nightly throe
Of scourge piacular, before he sleeps.
O'er a lost world the cloistered virgin weeps,
And makes her moan unheard by mortal ear;
From fen to fen the gleaming meteor leaps,
Drawing the long-belated traveller near,
Who, plunged in the morass, there ends life's sad career.

'Tis then the plotter ponders o'er his schemes,
Safe from the scrutinizing eye of day;
'Tis then the miser of his treasure dreams,
And basks awhile in fancy's cheating ray:
Then the bold wanton snares her thoughtless prey,
And leaves him with her curse upon him; then
All the fell broods of sin begin their play,
And howl their orgies, whilst unholy men
Join the loud revel in her foul and leprous den.

Night is the solemn harbinger of ill,
The season dark of infamy and crime:
The deadly thief, the assassin, deadlier still,
Then reap their fruits, for then's their harvest time.
Vice walks at large when night is at its prime,
And in its slumbers fires the youthful brain,
There playing off her dextrous pantomime:
Guilt strikes the alarum then, and in his train
The whirlwind passions throng to solemnize his reign.

Beneath her covert, murder &mdash; midnight's hag&mdash;
Skulks from the moon, and eyes it down the sky;
Then limps abroad, and from the pointed crag
Thrusts down her victim, and returns the cry
Of laughter as the death-shriek echoes nigh.
Night!  all thy works are black as are thy weeds&mdash;
Thine is the hour of ill's supremacy!
By thee are countenanced those ruthless deeds
At which the cheek grows pale, the heart of pity bleeds.

Sad is the theme which has engaged the pen
Of one whose wit, of one whose muse is young:
To show the end of vice to vicious men,
The lyre, unnoted yet, has now been strung.
Oft have the crimes of stormy minds been sung
In strains of loftiest measure, which to hear,
The thrill of rapture through the heart has rung;&mdash;
But deem not that I vainly would compeer
With bards of high repute, &mdash; they far transcend my sphere.

Beneath a blasted pine alone reclined
On its gnarled roots, a wild and withered man,
Whose wretched plight proclaimed his wreck of mind:
O'er his scarred cheek the streams of sorrow ran,
Checked by mad laughter, or the muttered ban.
As the broad moon chased each careering cloud,
Which o'er her disk its rapid course began,
With gesture fierce he'd rave his griefs aloud,
While to his troubled brain the maddening visions crowd.

Mocking the horrors of the midnight storm,
His wrinkled temples naked to the blast,
In night's chill dews he'd drench his wasted form,
And on the flint his wounded body cast.
Oft would the wretched man, unconscious, fast
Till weakened nature could endure no more,
Then take the proffered crust, his sole repast,
And to the winds his dismal wailings pour,
Nor seek, till quite o'erspent, his low and lonely door.

But Quiet mocked his seeking; memory there
Mapped on his mind the past, till the hot tear
Provoked the frantic ravings of despair,
Which fell, with frightful note, on pity's ear.
The casual passenger who wandered near,
O'ercome with wonder at the strange lament,
Quickened his pace, oppressed with sudden fear,
And crossed his blanching forehead as he went,
Lest hell, on mission vile, some horrid imp had sent.

Is this the being whose capacious soul
Could scarce be fettered to the fleshly crust
Which curbed its flight to that unearthly goal
Beyond the distant stars?  Oh!  what a rust
Has cankered o'er it now!  and e'en the dust
In which 'tis jailed has felt the deadly blight!
Behold how grief, stern scourger of the just,
Has done destruction's work!  Oh!  piteous sight!
Crushed is the elastic soul beneath its matchless might.

Time was when lustre sparkled in that eye
Which spoke the language of a mighty mind;
When in that bosom the big pulse beat high
With all that virtue felt; where every kind
And bland expression of the heart could find
Instant access; &mdash; there lurked no deadly sin;
Religion and the hate of vice combined
To guard the citadel of peace within,
And there was mulch, in sooth, the love of heaven to win.

Alas!  how changed, and, like some fretted page
O'er which old Time has swept with spoiling wing,
How marred!  There nothing lovely to engage
The eye or heart; a temple mouldering,
By the loud thunder shook, and tottering
Upon its frail foundation, ere it fall.
Poor wanderer!  in life's athletic spring,
Ere sorrow in thy cup had wrung its gall,
Thou wert fame's favourite theme &mdash; thy praise was prized by all.

Thine was the very deadliest draught of woe,
A life of thriftless toil, and care, and pain,
Which did a darkness o'er thy spirit throw.
That mind, once stored with all a mind could gain,
Has burst the bonds of reason, and its rein
Is snapped for ever.  Misery's blasting stroke
Has paralyzed the heart, convulsed the brain,
And left thee, like a scathed and branchless oak,
To wither at the root, thy spirit wrenched and broke.

Yonder beneath the night-star's lucid beam
He sits, o'ershadowed by that sapless tree
Which lightning storms have blasted; not a gleam
Of mental sunshine lights the troubled sea
Of fancies wild that mar his memory.
That eye's dilated stare too sadly speaks
A mind o'erthrown in its maturity:
Through the time-fretted channels of his cheeks
Rolls the warm tear-drop, unrestrained and free,
Telling its eloquent tale of secret misery.

Dire was the still-remembered cause which wrought
This havoc of the mind, this wreck of sense:
Audacious vice her deadly poison brought,
Drugging joy's sparkling cup, with bold pretence;
And, grasping at the gem of innocence,
Hurled the bright casket to untimely fate.
Woe meets in this world doubtful recompense,
But in another &mdash; hear, ye worldly great&mdash;
The Lazarus shall rise when kings endure defeat.

Here are the chartered rights of virtue spurned,
And man proclaims himself his fellow's foe.
The golden calf is worshipped; vice is turned
Loose on her prey, whilst, like a timid doe,
Virtue retires to shun the menaced woe.
Those feverish pangs of guilt which probe and thrill
The conscious heart) none but the guilty know;
There is the secret sanctuary of ill&mdash;
On it her vampires prey, and foully gorge their fill.

Mammon's our god &mdash; we serve him with a zeal
Which, offered to the High and Holy One,
Would save our souls alive, and make us feel
All that the Deity for man has done,
When on the sacred mount the palm he won
O'er death and hell, and crushed the serpent's head.
Would we but strive our little course to run
In that same path on which the Saviour shed
Such glory from the skies &mdash; no cause were then for dread.

Oh!  what a blessed world might this be still,
If man but did his best to make it so;
Virtue would neutralize the powers of ill
If her fair fruits were gathered as they grow.
'Tis to our own blind errors that we owe
The greatest of our griefs:  had guilt ne'er been,
This were a world of peace, and not of woe;
We're forced by no fatality to sin&mdash;
Vice lays her gaudy snare, and we rush freely in.

Now mark the wretched, melancholy man
On yonder rivulet's projecting brink,&mdash;
While winds, with rude salute, his temples fan,&mdash;
Stoop his spare body to the wave to drink.
He rises now &mdash; now gravely stops to think,
As with some vast design his fancy teemed;
Then from the half-formed purpose seems to shrink,
Like a scared child at night from what he dreamed,
When fiction's monsters dire life's vivid pictures seemed.

He draws in silence towards the water's side,
And gazes on its surface, calm and clear,
Whereon the laughing moon, in conscious pride,
Shows her reflected figure, bright and sheer,&mdash;
To sober thought, to melancholy dear.
With idiot laugh he plunges in the stream,
To catch &mdash; the lustrous orb which seems so near;
The quivering waters interrupt its beam,
When rage dilates his eye &mdash; his muttering lips blaspheme.

He struggles with the waters, calm and cold,
Nor, till their spray has drenched him, seeks the shore:
Still shines the fair resemblance, broad and bold,
Its brightness interrupted now no more;
The chaste original, with silvery oar,
Glides, like heaven's goddess, down her native sky,
Nor heeds the wretch, whose wandering feet explore&mdash;
Whilst o'er his naked head the storm is high&mdash;
Wilds where no human footstep meets the anxious eye.

He listens to the murmuring of the blast,
His gaze the while fixed on the dim, dun air,
As if a voice spoke in it of the past&mdash;
As if the sounds of love and joy were there.
A smile is on his lips; the vacant stare
A moment leaves his eye, but soon returns
With fierce increase, the gleamings of despair
His blighted peace hope's visitation spurns&mdash;
Still in his heart and brain the fire of frenzy burns.

The smothered accents of his tongue betray
How blank the wilderness within, where crowd
Wild fantasies, chimeras dire, that play
The mockery with their parent.  Now aloud
He raves against the moon, as some swift 'cloud
O'er its orb dashes; and the bubbling blood
Warm from his tongue, which the jagged teeth have plow'd,
Streams o'er his withered lips a crimson flood,
And stains &mdash; oh, piteous sight! &mdash; the earth on which he stood.

Across his path the bat, on leathern wing,
Betwixt the glimpses of the moon appears;
He gazes at the desultory thing
As in eccentric flight its course it steers.
Now it holds onwards, now obliquely veers
Beyond the casual compass of his eye:
He laughs aloud, in mockery of his tears,
And as his gaze is fixed upon the sky,
His maniac-laugh renews whene'er it passes by.

Before him, towering monarch of the wood,
The loaded mango rears his giant form:
Oft had his trunk and lofty crest withstood
The crashing horrors of a tropic storm.
When the hoarse thunder spread its wild alarm,
And lightnings scattered desolation round&mdash;
Whilst raged these fearful ministers of harm,
He, though his verdant honours strewed the ground,
Still braved the desperate strife, but yet no victor found.

The hapless subject of my lay drew nigh,
And raised his head to scan the stately tree;
The winds had paused awhile, and not a sigh
Disturbed the moment's fixed tranquillity.
He gazed an instant, then on bended knee
Grasped the rough trunk &mdash; with many a tug and strain
Trying his might, but unavailingly,
To cast its ponderous body on the plain;
Then groaned in baffled rage, and gnashed his teeth in vain.

Now pours the maniac his sepulchral voice
In a wild flow of voluntary song.
If taste be absent, feeling guides his choice,
And float the sad notes plaintively along,
Until they die the neighbouring hills among.
The prowling jackal listens to the tone
Though hunger in his rabid breast be strong,
And stops and pricks his ears, whilst all alone
The unconscious wanderer makes his melancholy moan.

He scares the slumbering sparrow from the spray,
And rouses from its rest the bounding deer;
The forest tribes before his steps give way,
And flee, as if some evil thing were near.
With piercing scream, which falls upon night's ear
Like a shrill death-watch, he observes their flight,
And his eye glistens as he marks their fear.
With hoot and howl he adds to their affright,
And wakes the sleeping echoes with his wild delight.

Alas!  poor sufferer!  a portion thine
Alike the needy and the rich may dread!
Who shall interpret fate's mysterious line?
In doubt's uncertain path we blindly tread,
Till in the "lap of earth" we rest our head.
Let us for those at least reserve a sigh
Who eat from woe's spare hand their daily bread,
Nor, self-secure, all future ills defy,
For dangers often lurk where least we think them nigh.

Life's May-day may be jocund, and its eve
Of summer close auspicious, while the sun
Of pleasure shines unclouded:  few perceive,
When dangers are remote, the risks they run:
All hope the goal of happiness is won,
Till o'er them misery lifts its withering arm;
Hope and reality are never one&mdash;
Experience soon dissolves the dreamy charm,
Which ardent fancies work that least have known alarm.

Observe the strange vicissitudes of time!
Each hour is loaded with its separate share
Of good or ill, of moral or of crime;
And though the power that governs all may spare
Some few light bosoms from the stings of care,
Small is the lot thus portioned; wretchedness
Treads in our path, and meets us everywhere:
Want pines in mournful silence, while distress
Proclaims herself twin-born with human happiness.

Do riches purchase bliss, or fame content?
Mark those vast stores of gold which only gild
The dust in which they're buried!  Adamant
The heart that hoards, from which there ne'er distilled
The dews of charity; where never thrilled
One keen emotion of requiting love.
Peace dwells not in the coffer richly filled,
Nor in the breast of fame secures her dove&mdash;
She holds no league with man &mdash; her empire is above.

And what are titles, honours, or the gauds
That deck nobility &mdash; those toys of state
Which man's vain glory now so much applauds?
What are the proud distinctions of the great,
But burdens of such sore and crushing weight
As bend him to the very dust he spurns!
Oft from the portals of the rich man's gate&mdash;
No sanctuary there &mdash; contentment turns,
While glowing hot within the torch of discord burns.

If wealth increase our pleasures, does it not
Increase our wishes also, and our cares?
And surely that must be the happiest lot
Which has the fewest wants.  The hardiest tares
Grow in the richest soil, and pleasure bears
Honey and wormwood on the self-same stem.
Go, man of wealth and power, and see how fares
Guilt's soul-stung victim!  To dispel thy phlegm,
Hie where woe's sufferers writhe, and learn for once from them.

Go where the madman woos thee to perpend
The deep intensity of mortal care&mdash;
Where not one ray of happiness can blend
With the benighting horrors of despair&mdash;
Go, and receive an awful lesson there!
There what a cheek to tame the swell of pride;
Man's form is here, but heaven's bright image where?
No gleam of sunshine flashes through the void
Of banished intellect &mdash; now maddened and destroy'd.

Eternal God!  thy lesson here is writ
In characters we never can mistake:
All would grow wiser, better, learning it,
And all should Learn it for their interest's sake.
The judgments of Omnipotence o'ertake
The best, for purposes unknown, yet wise.
How few their thirst at joy's pure fountain slake!
Poor child of dust!  earth no true bliss supplies:
Its roots are only here &mdash; it blossoms in the skies.

Behold once more the subject of my song
Still tiring with his moans the ear of night!
The woodland warblers, as he strolls along,
Flutter before him in reluctant flight.
The reckless troubler heeds not their affight,
But still pursues his solitary way,
And, as fresh objects pass before his sight,
Resumes his sad but desultory lay,
And shakes, with motion wild, his tresses silver gray.

"Bertha!" he cries, "my child, &mdash; alas!  my child,
Dost thou not know me? &mdash; though I'm old and spare,
Though all men shun my sight, declare me wild,
Believe them not, for I can laugh at care
When thou art nigh me, &mdash; aye, and will forswear
All future commerce with that deathly race
Who made my tranquil cot a tiger's lair:&mdash;
Come, let me gaze upon that angel face,
Where oft mine eye had fixed its fondest resting-place.

"My Bertha!  ha! &mdash; and is not Bertha dead?
Did I not see her golden tresses trail
Along the turf on which her Edgar bled?
Howl, ye malignant demons of the gale,
Let havoc loose, your blasting breath exhale
May heaven and earth in dire concussion meet&mdash;
How would the strife my blighted soul regale!
Man is my foe accursed! &mdash; ye lightnings fleet,
Wing on his head your bolts &mdash; revenge is ever sweet:

"And I will gulp its poisons till my heart
Grow black and morbid with the festering bane;
Restore my girl, ye bloodhounds; shall we part,
Because her injured father is not sane?
The lustre of his mind is on the wane,
And Bertha's sire is now reputed mad.
Approach, my child; expunge the damning stain;
Greet but my sight.  once more and make me glad,
For ah!  the poor old man is solitary, sad.

"Dead &mdash; dead!" &mdash; the voice in smothered whispers died:
He paused and shuddered; then, with doleful yell,
Dashed to the earth his staff, and deeply sighed.
Hearing at length the distant matin bell,
The sound aroused him, and, as by a spell
Awakened from a trance of horrid thought,
He raised his head and smiled: &mdash; ah!  who shall tell
What sad expression from that eye was caught,
When to his mind remembrance some dark image brought.

What an appalling sight, alas!  was there!
His bony arms above his head were flung
In a wild agony; the scanty hair
He tore from the trenched scalp, and fiercely wrung
His lank and fleshless fingers, as if stung
By the sleek death-worm:  ever and anon
He poured the direst curses from his tongue.
But though so frantic when the fit was on,
He soon again grew calm, poor heart-wrung woe-begone!

Morning had fully dawned upon him now,
And from the hills dispersed their mists of gray;
Wan from the midnight watch, his squalid brow
Disclosed new terrors at the rise of day.
There deep the traces of distraction lay&mdash;
Its fires at intervals illumed his eye,
Which glared with vacant and "lack-lustre" ray,
Like the paled sun in a November sky,
Peering through murky clouds, when the fierce storm is high.

Yet there stands he &mdash; how changed from former years!
Like a storm-shattered ship when on the deep,
Her sails and cordage rent, she scarcely steers
Her slow course through the waters.  Go and weep,
Ye that in pleasure's soft embraces sleep,
O'er the sad ruin, till around your hearts
The bland emotions of compassion creep!
Behold the wreck of all that mind imparts
To man above the brutes, 'till the warm tear-drop starts!

The matin choristers above his head
Pour out their liquid notes to hail the morn,
But to their harmony his soul is dead:
Care from his heart the social link had torn.
The playful lambkin as it crops the thorn
Stops to observe the melancholy man:
The tuneful lark springs blithely from the corn
And hovers nigh, &mdash; still nought in nature can
Light to a gleam of joy those features, wild and wan.

Behold him now upon yon beetling rock
Plucking the ivy from its sides of jet!
He wreathes a leaf in every straggling lock
On his lean brow, and forms a coronet
Of rude, fantastic seeming:  still beset
At intervals with dark imaginings&mdash;
Past sorrows which he never can forget
To memory rush; &mdash; upon his feet he springs,
And, rage-possessed, resumes his frantic wanderings.

Towards the bright sun the wretched madman turned,
Its glowing beams upon his temples played:
Within his brain the maddening fever burned,
Nor had the damps of night its fires allayed:&mdash;
His flashing eye a dire intent betrayed.
Onward at length he rushed, with vigorous bound,
To the near mountain's brow; thence, undismayed,
Casting one wild, distracted glance around,
Plunged headlong from the height into the gulf profound.

Deformed and shrunken by the solar ray,
Deep in a pathless glen the body lies,
To forest beasts, to carrion fowls a prey,
Far from the pious search of kindred eyes:
To the fierce glow exposed of tropic skies,
Unknown to friends or kindred if despair
Had crushed its victim; with unsure surmise
They seek the hapless maniac everywhere,
Yet disappointment only mocks their anxious care.

Nor 'till the bones had whitened in the sun,
Knew they where lay the once-bewildered man.
Now stretched on earth a grinning skeleton&mdash;
Oh!  what a sight for living eyes to scan!&mdash;
O'er the dried bones foul aconite began
To weave its deadly foliage, and dense weeds
Along the arching ribs their tendrils ran;
Beneath the skull, the worm, the scorpion breeds,
And on their fattening slime the greedy hemlock feeds.

What a sad lesson to the mind is read,
When we behold man's form in its decay!
The vanished features and the eyeless head,
The lipless mouth, whence once the sportive lay
Was breathed to the rapt ear &mdash; now what are they&mdash;
The well-turned sinewy limbs, the lusty frame?&mdash;
Atoms of earth &mdash; a mass of sightless clay!
A thing for the dark charnel! &mdash; Oh, how tame
Becomes our pride when we but syllable its name!

Thrice had the moon her monthly measure filled;
Thrice wheeled her chariot round the vault of heaven,
Since he, whose ravings pleasure never stilled,
By the wild impulse of distraction driven,
Dismissed, uncalled, the life which God had given.
His friends still deemed him wandering, yet the sigh
Of doubt would rise, lest he should die unshriven.
All sought to meet as wont his piercing eye;
None met the fearful man, yet none, alas!  knew why.

And the stark outline had remained for ever
In secret burial on the trackless wild,
Had not a youth, in puerile endeavour
To climb the mount where rocks, uncouthly piled,
Showed peril to be there, &mdash; so wayward child
Provokes the praises of his young compeers,&mdash;
Adventured up the steep, by sport beguiled;
When in the dark ravine beneath appears
The bleaching bones of him whose woes have claimed your tears.

Recovered from that open sepulchre,
The sapless relics freight at length the grave.
Mass after mass was heard, with dirge and prayer,
The soul from purgatorial thrall to save.
Over his dust no marble traceries wave:
A simple stone reveals his age and name,
Laid sculptureless within the chapel's nave.
Though no Pythonic fire my breast inflame,
Still have I done my best to give his woes to fame.

'Twas Wallace, that, while hoarse the screech-owl sung,
Poured o'er his crumbling bones the burial prayer.
The sallow monk o'er these sad relics hung,
As if the last of all he loved was there.
The fixed and ashy lip &mdash; the lurid stare,
When closed the solemn service for the dead,
The still deep feelings of his heart declare:
There yet the bitter roots of grief were fed,
And o'er the blasted soil their morbid influence shed.

That morning the piaculary lash
Was with fresh vigour to his limbs applied;
The penance-drops from many an opening gash
Rolled, slow and tepid, down his haggard side;
His tongue gave forth no groan, and yet he sighed
As his charged breast would burst &mdash; the penance o'er,
He breathed a low, faint prayer to heaven, and died.
Poor child of woe!  who shall thy fate deplore?
Thy soul is with its God, where grief can sting no more.

Here pause the song!  nor let meek pity's eye
Refuse the gentle tribute of a tear!
If e'er misfortune merited a sigh,
The soul of feeling would award it here.
Where is Eumenes now &mdash; that man of fear&mdash;
And Wallace, whither? &mdash; their unhappy doom
Has forced a strain upon the patient ear.
The muse now quits her theme and for each tomb
May the narcissus thrive, the rue's meek flowrets bloom!
