A stranger now was welcomed at the cot,
One who had quitted in his childhood's prime
The dear land of his birth, to trace his lot
In other regions of a rougher clime,
Where oft refinement does but varnish crime.
There, whilst experience spread her varied store,
Collected from the fruitful womb of time,
He read her painful lessons o'er and o'er,
To wisdom added much, but yet to virtue more.

Amid the thronged communities of men
Must knowledge be explored, experience gained:
'Tis from the tongue, as well as from the pen,
That either must be sought, and both obtained.
Where the young judgment, rash and unrestrained,
Is ripe for service, it were well and wise
To give it scope, nor hold too tightly reined.
'Tis mid the busy world we learn to prize,
By contrast with its ills, the blessings of the skies.

We live but for instruction; without this,
What were the world and all its pageantries?
For knowledge in the crown of human bliss
Is its most radiant gem:  the noblest ties
That link this passing world's communities
In fellowship, to knowledge all are due,
And happiest they who are most truly wise.
Religion will supply the ready clue
To those who wisdom's maze with honest minds pursue.

Edgar was left an orphan by his sire
Ere quickening thought had reason's sway confessed;
He recked it not, for then the glowing fire
Of mind was in the spark &mdash; its light repressed.
Eumenes now the hapless babe caressed,
And by his care a parent's loss supplied;
The boy his infant gratitude expressed,
And, with a sense of what he owed him, tried
To fix his guardian's love, nor was that love denied.

His mother, at that agonizing hour
When the first curse assailed her fainting frame,
Had yielded to his all-pervading power
Who spares nor prince nor slave; and when he came
To cast her to the worms, and sweep her name
From the fair annals of recording time,
Her husband sank beneath the shock:  the same
Cold grave enshrouds them; in their being's prime
Both left this world of cares for heaven's eternal clime.

Eumenes mourned them with a brother's love;
And, ere the fountain of his grief was dried,
Like a protecting spirit from above
Took to his home their offspring, and supplied
The loss of sire and mother.  Woe betide
That stubborn heart which melts not at the sight
Of the poor orphan's tears! &mdash; Young Edgar tried
How his protector he might best requite,
And did his kind behests with a most pure delight.

Quick sped the days of infancy along,
Unchecked his joys by incidental ill,
Till thought had birth and intellect grew strong,
And gave a nobler impulse to the will.
His guileless heart had no alarms to still,
For who in childhood drinks woe's troubled spring?
Bliss did its bounteous measure more than fill,
And strewed the waste o'er time's unwearied wing,
Who urged his steady flight unstayed, unnoticing.

His father to Eumenes had been dear,
Both equal sharers in one painful birth.
Twin-born, they loved and dotingly, nor fear
Of guile in either marred their mutual worth,
Till death &mdash; the mightiest tyrant upon earth&mdash;
Broke the sweet union, and obscured the sun
On joy's horizon:  then contentment's dearth
And pleasure's gloomier obsequies begun&mdash;
Then o'er a brother's peace sorrow her victory won.

Eumenes, in his earlier years, had been
A soldier, and his country's battles fought.
Much hard and deadly service had he seen,
And with his blood a dear experience bought:
A gallant reputation he had sought
Amid the scenes of carnage and of scathe.
But earthly good is e'er with evil fraught;
For, whilst his fame was ripening, slander's breath
Cast o'er that fame a taint &mdash; more dreaded oft than death.

He had deserved no slander, and her tongue
Roused all the angry feelings of his soul;
They were most ardent then, for he was young,
And his fierce passions under slight control.
O'er his intrepid heart there quickly stole
A deep and fixed resolve; with flashing eye
He sought the vile defamer, &mdash; for the whole
Was envy's work, &mdash; threw in his teeth the lie,
And dared him to the field his prowess there to try.

They fought; the slanderer fell, and then, alas
Remorse stung deeply the young soldier's breast.
How death drowns all our enmities! &mdash; they pass,
Like whirlwinds spent, and sink at once to rest!
Eumenes now, by a new grief opprest&mdash;
For on his soul there was a crimson stain&mdash;
With deepest ruth his damning guilt confest.
A burning fever fixed upon his brain,
And his probed heart was wrung, nor was it wrung in vain.

There is for all a portion of distress;
The tenure by which human life is held
Has this severe condition.  Happiness
Leaps from the grasp, and will not be compelled:
Sometimes her false light shines, but scarce beheld
Ere fades the bright delusion on the view.
Where once the flickering meteor is dispelled,
It were a vain endeavour to pursue&mdash;
Life's but a maze at best, and this Eumenes knew.

He left his country for a distant land,
Where his calm days were spent in sweet repose:
Nor was it long ere he joined heart and hand
To a young bride, and soon forgot his woes.
Years thus past smoothly on, but misery chose
Once more to bruise him when his Alice died.
Bertha, though but an infant then, to close
The angry wound, with artless effort, tried,
And in her father's heart her mother's loss supplied.

Such was young Edgar's guardian:  he had been
In suffering's severe ordeal tried,
And therefore could for others feel, I ween,
To whom heaven's poorest, blessings were denied.
His heart was ample as the world is wide,
And pity, like a cherub, nestled there:
As time pursued his hurried course, he sighed
To think what woes are scattered everywhere
Around this busy world, that feed the worm of care.

The infant Edgar, to his charge consigned,
With fond concern he nourished as his own,
And, like a father, wisely disciplined
A trust so sacred on his bounty thrown.
Soon Edgar's years of infancy had flown,
And boyhood's rosy blush his cheeks o'erspread
Within his brain the seeds of wit were sown,
And grew productive in that, genial bed,
Whilst books, with nurture fit, the rising harvest fed.

Mark childhood's blessed era!  'tis a dream
Of sweet unconsciousness &mdash; a living vision,
Where in imagination's kindling beam
The forms of fancy bask, as in derision
Of all those ills which oft, in stern collision,
Meet and condense their energies, and pour
On some unconscious head, with fierce decision
The mingled torrent down! &mdash; the sportive hour
Of childhood's ever free from misery's withering power;

For then we look not onward, then our views
Are to the happy present all confined
Across our path no thorns affliction strews,
And the young thoughts soar free as mountain wind:
The soul is gentle as the heart is kind,
For evil is a stranger to it then:
To all that may be, innocently blind.
Nothing but pleasure, how and where and when
'Twill smile, pervades it &mdash; wounded but to heal again.

There are no fretting heartaches then, to tell
Of by-gone happiness; the sparkling tear
Which falls o'er childhood's cheek is not the knell
Of pleasures just departed, nor of fear
The doleul harbinger; it is a mere
Bright cloud that passes o'er a brighter sun,
And leaves, or seems to leave, the disk more clear.
Alas!  when infancy's brief course is run,
Peace wraps her head in storms &mdash; the war of life's begun.

Oh!  I remember well &mdash; that hour, alas!
Is long since "numbered with the things o'erpast"&mdash;
When in the future's ever-clouded glass
I marked a scene of things not doomed to last!
Those pageants to the earth have long been cast
Which in my youthful fancy I had reared;
All have been levelled by the angry blast
Of disappointment:  still my heart is cheered,
For hope's bright star is up, from clouds and darkness cleared.

And, Edgar, such thy childhood!  nothing then
Clouded the prospect of thy future day!
Amid the quiet of thy native glen
Thy early years of boyhood passed away.
Around thee an enchanting prospect lay,
Nor didst thou look beyond for future pleasure!
Whether engaged in study or in play,
Thy soul imbibed enjoyment without measure&mdash;
To thee thy home was heaven, in sooth earth's sweetest treasure.

The little Bertha was thy playmate when
Fresh in the beauty of her babyhood:
Together o'er the hill and through the glen
Would ye both wander, till the mantling blood
Tinged each fair cheek; and oft, in sportive mood,
Exchange &mdash; pure souls! &mdash; the innocent caress.
Ah!  it was then that guardian angels stood
As nightly watchers your repose to bless,
And all was bright around, for all was happiness.

The stripling grew in stature and in years&mdash;
There was a glory brightening o'er his mind:
Already on his open brow appears
The fair-writ index of a soul refined;
Where virtue's artless feelings were combined
With all that honour knew of good or great.
His heart had not yet learned to be unkind,
But at the cries of woe responsive beat;
For pity there had sought and found secure retreat.

But he was destined now for other scenes,
Where he might trace, with an observant eye,
The principles of men, their "ways and means,"
And learn to live, that he might learn to die.
For 'tis amidst the vast community
That we can study best the heavenly plan,
In all its wonderful variety,
Displayed in that stupendous creature, man,
Whose mind can grasp a world &mdash; whose life is but a span.

Such as have known how sad it is to leave
The home they love; to look on all that's dear
For the last time, it may be, and bereave
The heart of all it dotes on:  not a tear
To cool the burning throbs which tell how near
'Tis breaking, with the keenest anguish wrung;&mdash;
They who have felt all this, may fancy here
What keen emotions Edgar's bosom stung,
When in his anxious ear the farewell accents rung.

Up to his throat the strong emotion leapt,
And with a quick, convulsive agony
Choked his free utterance; for a while it kept
The dry tongue mute, until a bursting sigh,
Poured from the wrung breast's inmost cavity,
Assuaged his torture, fierce, indeed, but brief,
He scarce could falter forth the fond "good bye,"
But pressed his guardian's hand in silent grief,
Till the big tear found way, and gave a short relief.

With heaving bosom and averted eve,
He hurried from his guardian's warm embrace,
And left, with many a melancholy sigh,
The lonely cot &mdash; his infant dwelling place.
The scalding tears streamed down his cheeks apace,
As his tongue faintly gave its last farewell.
Towards ocean's liquid waste he turned his face,
And saw the world's dark troubles in its swell&mdash;
His heart's convulsive throbs defied all power to quell.

Ten rapid years beneath a temperate sun,
The orphan boy in swift improvement spent;
And, though his manhood's dawn had scarce begun,
Yet genius had her best assistance lent
To feed his mind with fruitful aliment.
The happy period of return drew nigh,
And soon dispelled all clouds of discontent:
Bright gleams of promised bliss illumed his eye,
As the horizon closed on Europe's colder sky.

How his young spirit leaped, when from the shore
Swept the light pinnace, and the pebbly strand
Faded before his view! &mdash; the sullen roar
Of the stern waters, foaming to the land,
Poured music on his soul more sweet and bland
Than the mild curfew to the ploughman's ear.
How his heart bounded when his eager hand
Grasped the rough cordage, and, 'mid many a cheer,
He sprung upon the deck, and thought of raptures near.

Ah!  he remembers well the time gone by,
When he left all he loved; and the warm tear
Now gathered slowly in each hope-lit eye,
As towards his native land the ship drew near.
Still to the heart there clung sometimes a fear,
Lest he should never more his home regain:
Oft-times, in spite of hope, forebodings drear
Would with dark fantasies o'ercloud his brain,
When brighter thoughts crept in to cheer his mind in vain.

Go where we may, the land where first we viewed
The glorious light can never be forgot:
Though 'twere a sad and dreary solitude,
Still home's a dear and consecrated spot,
To which the absent fancy loves to allot
Utopian blessings; for we picture there
All that the social mind displeases not&mdash;
All that the fancy frames of good and fair;
And this world's genuine joys are found no other where.

Go ask the exile what his pangs of soul,
When absent from the land that gave him birth.
That pigmy race who freeze beneath the Pole
Seek not the comforts of a stranger hearth:
Each country has its own peculiar worth,
And for its sons retains a secret charm,
Which never can be found on foreign earth.
The swarth barbarian feels his bosom warm
When thoughts of home arise &mdash; they hush grief's lashing storm.

Take the rough savage from his native wild
Where, from the haunts of more enlightened men
Sequestered, never in his path have smiled
The cherub groups of pleasure, &mdash; what will then
Be his bereavement! &mdash; for his native glen,
Filled with congenial beasts of prey, he sighs&mdash;
His fondest wish to court its gloom again:
Used but to view the naked earth and skies
His simple mind disdains all earth-born pageantries.

Breathes there a man, of mind so dense and dead
As not to hang with fond idolatry
O'er that dear land for which his sires have bled&mdash;
The land too of his own nativity,
The country of his home?  If such there be,
Poor worm of narrow soul &mdash; if soul be thine&mdash;
Thou hast disgraced its immortality!
The ice of apathy has dimmed its shine:&mdash;
Great God of heaven and earth, may such be never mine!

Edgar approached the shore for which he sighed;
And as fair breezes wooed the swelling sails,
Through his full heart rushed joy's impetuous tide.
As his ear drinks the music of the gales
His pulse beats quick; no more his spirit quails,
But transport swells within him, as his glance
Darts keenly forward; hope o'er fear prevails,
Whilst in his brain the warm ideas dance,
Until he's quite absorbed in rapture's dizzy trance.

Oft from the prow he casts a wistful eye
O'er the vast world of waters, which appear
One wide interminable waste, where lie
Deep in their coral caves the costly gear
Of kings and mighty monarchies; for here,
In all their unexplored immensity,
Are piled the stores of ages; deep and clear
Above them rolls the illimitable sea,
And to a wondering world proclaims the Deity.

Here what a scope for thought, when, by the storm
Lashed into rage, the chaffing billows roll;
When howling blasts the face of heaven deform,
And fill with dire alarms the daunted soul:
When o'er the briny Alps &mdash; bare every pole&mdash;
The groaning vessel leaps against the skies,
Scarcely obedient to the helm's control,
What mingled feelings in the breast arise&mdash;
What terrors gather there amidst its wild surprise!

The port at length is gained, and by the lee
The boat is lowered with a merry roar.
Now through the surface of the glassy sea
The swift light pinnace flies beneath the oar.
Edgar the distance measures o'er and o'er,
His keen eye darting towards the welcome land:
The space soon lessens &mdash; now they gain the shore&mdash;
And as he springs upon the crowded strand
He feels the anxious grasp of many, a friendly hand.

Imagine now the frequent fond caress,
The anxious question, and the prompt reply.
Bertha in all her virgin loveliness
Approached, with hurried step and downcast eye,
To meet the glowing youth.  she knew not why,
But her heart fluttered with a new delight
Beyond the measure far of common joy;
Her smooth clear skin was tinged with blushes bright,
And her frame trembled too, in pleasure's pure despite.

Eumenes felt upon his fading cheek
The slow tear down its long-dried channel roll;
He pressed the proffered hand, but could not speak,
So full the warm emotions of his soul.
Such are the pains of pleasure, when the goal
Of hope is won &mdash; sweet sufferable throes
Too pleasurably painful to control!
O'er each fond bosom stole a sweet repose,
Like that mild summer calm when day is at its close.

When Edgar left for other lands his home,
Bertha had yet but eight brief summers seen
When he returned at length, no more to roam,
Hers was the blooming beauty of eighteen.
Now o'er her breast was drawn the kerchief screen,
Which hid its beauties from the wanton eye;
And she had such exaltedness of mien,
That the quaint rustic, as he passed her by,
Stopped for a while to gaze, and gazed, nor wondered why.

Oh!  what a heavenly sight it is to see
Young beauty rising into loveliness,
When, from the giddy freaks of childhood free,
She comes before our sight as if to bless
The eye she ravishes; and pure no less
Than spring's precocious violet, when it blows
In vernal sweetness o'er the wilderness:
Virtue, her guardian angel, round her throws
The fragrance of the skies, in which she lives and grows.

And who shall wonder if, as poets feign,
The forest's monarch, in his savage might,
Has crouched at beauty's feet, and shook his inane
In the redundance of his wild delight,
And purred and basked and fawned before her sight?
Woman's the magnet of this stormy sphere,
When through her soul shines virtue's hallowed light:
Without her, there were nought but misery here;
For what would man become if she were never near?

To sooth his anguish, when affliction wrings
Its festering bitters o'er his bursting heart;
To blunt the arrows which misfortune flings,
And with that balsam staunch the bleeding part,
Which she alone can minister!  Sin's dart
How oft by her plucked out, when, firm and deep
Within man's breast infixed with deadly smart!
She like an angel hovers o'er his sleep,
When through his burning veins disease's poisons creep.

While Bertha blushed before him, Edgar's heart
Danced with ecstatic joy as he beheld
Her lovely form, and knew her nobler part
To be the lovelier still:  he scarcely quelled
His transports on beholding her, but, spelled
By that form's lustre, stood in mute amaze:
His bounding blood was painfully repelled;
And as his eye to hers he dared to raise,
His vivid glance betrayed a mute but ardent praise.

He now observed the change in Bertha's form
With rapture to his soul before unknown;
He left a sapling shrinking from the storm,
But found a plant to full perfection grown.
Soon did his heart the force of beauty own&mdash;
For who can baffle her almighty power?
There love's prolific seeds were quickly sown,
Took root, and grew, and ripened into flower,
And gathered deeper bloom from every passing hour.

The maid at first by fits on Edgar gazed,
But with a side-long glance, demure and coy;
When to his manly brow her sight was raised,
She felt the sudden thrill of inward joy.
He who had left his home a blooming boy,
With all the riper charms of man returned:&mdash;
Soon in his breast, too ardent to'destroy,
The flame of love's bright altar purely burned,
And love's endearing task he most adeptly learned;&mdash;

A task o'er which 'tis passing sweet to pore,
For ever grateful and for ever new:
How we delight to con his lessons o'er
Whilst our warm thoughts provoke the fond review!
As to the pole the trembling steel is true,
So the heart hovers o'er his sacred shrine.
How does young hope love's hallowed joys pursue&mdash;
Joys which are only second to divine,
When from their sacred source the rays of virtue shine!

As the pale star across the desert drear
Guides the lone wanderer through the gloom of night,
So love &mdash; the pole-star of our brief career&mdash;
Through this mixed world of sorrow and delight,
Brightens our course and cheers our dreary plight;
And when man's purpose here his influence guides,
Our souls emerge from darkness into light:
The sweetest earthly blessings he provides&mdash;
He best protects, and steers through passion's stormy tides.

Yet oft he plays the wanton in the heart,
Proud to establish there his fickle sway.
Through woman's eye he aims the wily dart
Which strikes to sting and goad, if not to slay.
Whene'er we fall to moody griefs a prey,
He calls on woman's cheek the witching smile
That works the soft emotions into play:
In action secret, prone to craft and wile,
His ways, though often pure, still oftener lead to guile.

How variously he slopes the way to crime,
Oft hurling ruin on his victim's head!
How many has he blighted in their prime!
How many hearts have on his altar bled!
How has he swelled the number of the dead,
No more on earth from the dark grave to rise
Still he pours blessings on the good man's head&mdash;
The soul with lofty longings purifies,
Prepares it for its God, and lifts it to the skies.

When on the cheek begins the darkening down,
With gentle impulse first his power he tries:
The bounding blood with quicker gush is thrown
From its full source, whilst to the raptured eyes
The vivid beams of admiration rise.
Then beauty holds her empire, and the frame
Writhes under those keen pangs which love supplies:
He kindles then that fierce and quenchless flame,
Which, while it glows within, no human power can tame.

Untainted love is a most heavenly thing,
And heaven its origin, for "God is love."
From it the soul's sublimest motions spring,
Catching a sacred lustre from above
That shapes it for the skies, and, like the dove
Scared from her nest, bends thitherward its flight,
When stubborn griefs its lingering joys remove.
This love, and this alone, can cure the blight
Of sorrow, and restore the bosom's lost delight.

Edgar now bowed to that enchanting power
Which man's so little able to subdue:
He felt that love's imperishable flower
Within his breast with rich luxuriance grew.
Timid of hope, he dared not yet pursue
His passion's object with confession's tale:
Patient he watched to catch some kindly clue
That might unfold if love did yet assail
Her o'er whose spotless heart he studied to prevail.

In the mute language of the eyes unskilled,
Their silent eloquence on him was lost.
His fervent soul one sacred passion filled;
And what were life if once that love were crossed!
All this he felt:  and by those thoughts engrossed,
No other object charmed his eager sight
Save her, whom, when upon the billows tossed,
He had arrayed in charms supremely bright,
Though there, in truth, they shone but with diminished light.

Oft would he watch the motion of her eye
To catch the meaning of its placid beam:
But here the search could hardly aught descry
To realize his hope's delicious dream;
For what she was she almost feared to seem:
And though her heart all chilling thoughts denied,
Scarcely could Edgar yet her purpose deem.
While from herself she strove the truth to hide,
Still through her ardent veins poured love's resistless tide.

For she was mortal, though without a taint
Of loose or grovelling passion; and she felt
As chaste a love as eremite or saint
Might have blessed God to feel; and when she knelt
Before that God who had in mercy dealt
A happiness to her, for earth too rare,&mdash;
Warmed by that love, in holier raptures melt
Her deep pure sympathies; for she was fair
In spirit and in frame, as spotless angels are.

She had a sweet timidity that seemed
Almost to blush at its own artlessness.
Without her, heaven &mdash; so Edgar would have deemed,
Though rash the thought &mdash; had lacked one blessing less:
She, of all earthly things most formed to bless,
Seemed in the sky of his bright destiny
To shine, the sunlight of his happiness;
And when they met, no cold observer by,
His soul's whole impulse rushed into his sparkling eye.

Distant at first his anxious glance she met,
And from its vivid beam abashed recoiled;
But use &mdash; for young was her experience yet&mdash;
Soon to the eye's soft language reconciled.
Eumenes looked on either as his child,&mdash;
The only objects of his earthly care,&mdash;
While schemes for their behoof his days beguiled.
Associates every hour and every where,
They had of this world's bliss a large and mutual share.

As in the garden of the new-born earth,
Where all was perfect, and when all was young,
Before the progeny of sin had birth;&mdash;
When all the glorious stars together sung
Hosannas to their God; ere vice had wrung
The bosoms of the blest ones &mdash; blest as they,&mdash;
Yet by no pangs of guilty sorrow stung,&mdash;
The youthful lovers paced life's flowery way,
And time itself seemed loth to close so bright a day.

With what keen transport oft would Edgar gaze
On Bertha's beauty, till his kindled eye
Sent forth the flashes of its rapt amaze,
Catching a radiant lustre from the sky
Where the bright sun, in living light, on high
Pursued his course o'er the blue plain of heaven.
To her, whose pure heart echoed back his sigh,
From its chaste source in fond dismission driven,
He poured his secret forth, with artless rapture given:&mdash;

"Bertha, I feel within my throbbing breast,
And 'tis, in truth, a transport thus to feel,
Emotions such as may not be represt,
Lest my full bosom burst.  Shall I appeal
To a stern arbiter?  'Tis thou canst heal,
And thou alone, the medicable smart
Of a most holy love:  thy future weal
On earth, in heaven &mdash; whose fairest type thou art,
Will ever live in each fond purpose of my heart."

'Twas thus the doating Edgar dared avow
To Bertha's ear his love:  in silent ruth
She gazed unblushing on his manly brow,
And tracing there the lineaments of truth,
Looked, with consenting smile, upon the youth.
Both now had reached the climax of their bliss:
Their vows were pledged and registered; in sooth
Their lips had interchanged the willing kiss,&mdash;
And genuine love can know no holier joy than this.

The sacred token here of all we feel
That lifts our spirits from this grosser earth;
'Tis of the heart's acknowledged bond the seal
That with love's own impression stamps its worth.
The doting mother at her infant's birth
Bestows it fondly with rejoicing tears;
Go where we may, amid affection's dearth
'Tis still its tribute; &mdash; e'en the savage cheers
With this sweet pledge the swarth companion of his years.

Thus their affections ripened, thus they grew
Upon each other's hearts, and, rooted there,
Nothing was hidden from their mutual view;
For neither had a thought, a fear, a care,
Which both did not, in equal measure, share.
When she poured forth the treasures of her mind,
His brightening glance did its mute praise declare,
As to her honied words his ear inclin'd&mdash;
Words which might well have charmed the wisest of mankind.

Nor were his words by her regarded less,
For all he said to her indeed was dear,
And they flowed from him with a sweet excess.
With what absorbing interest would she hear
His tongue's melodious utterance, deep but clear,
When, with a soul-subduing energy,
He poured the Mantuan's music on her ear!
She'd watch the vivid glances of his eye,
And kindle as he glowed, when none but he was by.

As bright and cloudless as their native skies,
As mild and fragrant as prolific May,
The prospect smiles before them as they rise
Fresh from the feast of joy:  the placid ray
Of peace beams o'er them, hallowing their day,
And withering in its bud the growth of woe:
She strews content's fair flowers upon their way,
Whose essences exhale where'er they go,
And o'er their earthly path a heavenly fragrance throw.

