Revenge was burning still; with eager stride,
Scorched by its fires, the chief pursued his way;
By his fell agents watched, the homicide
Knew where was to be found his destined prey.
Thither, while passion's imps his heart o'erlay,
He sought the hapless Edgar, with a vow
To force him to his purpose, or to slay.
Big drops of anguish started from his brow,
And, a mere living curse, he paced the forest now.

Reclining at his length upon the ground,
Lulled by the gentle murmur of the stream,
The man of blood his fearless victim found
Wholly absorbed in love's delicious dream.
Screened by a thicket from the solar beam,
He was unconscious that a foe drew nigh;
O'er him suspicion cast no doubtful gleam,
For, ripened into full security,
His future views were bright as his own native sky.

The sight of Edgar on the sward reclining
Roused all the demon in his rival's breast,
And stirred up feelings there that mocked defining,&mdash;
That scared the brood of quiet from their rest.
Dead was the dove of peace upon her nest,
And passion's vulture preyed upon the corse&mdash;
When that has perished, who may dare be blest!
Stilled was each warning whisper of remorse,
And thus to Edgar's ear the savage made discourse.

"Audacious boy!  who dost presume to stand,
With bold pretence, betwixt my love and me,
Prepare to yield me Bertha's plighted hand;
Or by that power which formed both her and thee,
This arm shall consummate thy fate's decree.
Provoke not then, for 'tis in vain, the might
Of one whose fierce revenge, but once set free,
Thy soul to other realms shall wing its flight
Before yon gorgeous sun withdraw from earth his light.

"Be warned!  if still thou darest mine ire to move,
Thy life shall pay the forfeit of the deed:
To covet her whom I have deigned to love,
Demands my vengeance &mdash; mark me!  he shall bleed,
Who strives my nobler love to supersede.
But if thou wilt acknowledge thy consent
That Bertha from her vows to thee be freed,
The injured Akenside may then relent,
And make thee, for thy loss, a fair equivalent.

"All that my scope of fortune can procure
Shall to thy wants be ever freely given:
Thy happiness on earth will then be sure,
Nor needst thou further go in quest of heaven.
Speak thou whom folly has to rashness driven,
Is it thy wish that we be friends or foes?
Oppose not one whose heart, by passion riven,
Would with the very fiends in conflict close,
Did they, to work him bale, that passion's force oppose."

With arms compressing now his heaving breast,
And look of deadly hate, that did unfold
A most infernal meaning &mdash; 'twas a test
Of fiendish purpose not to be controlled&mdash;
He breathed defiance, and, with bearing bold,
Upon his rival glanced a, scornful eye:
That rapid glance a scheme of murder told,
Where search was made in vain for sympathy;
But Edgar met its scowl, and made this prompt reply:&mdash;

"Foes, braggart, may we never cease to be
Till death our bodies from our souls divide:
From terror's shackles is my mind too free
To fear the coward threats of Akenside.
Bertha, in spite of him, shall be the bride
Of one, full ready to maintain his right:
Too firmly, Lord, is Edgar's soul allied
To truth and honour, to withhold his might
When craven vaunts grow loud, and dare him to the fight.

"Take, for thy proffered friendship, back my scorn,
Nor think I heed thy threats or dread thy power.
Go to thy slaves, from shrieking mothers torn,
And lashed for thy base pastime; &mdash; go and lower
On those who at thy frowns must vilely cower,
Or feel the galling thong.  Shall Edgar yield
Unto thy robber hand love's loveliest flower?
No!  while this arm in its defence can wield
Weapon of war, this rightful arm shall be its shield."

He sprang upon his feet, and eyed the chief
With an expression of unmixed disdain.
The time for recollection now was brief,
For his revengeful purpose was too plain:
Fierce anger dashed through Edgar's breast amain
As he regarded his insulting foe;
And while that foe, yet writhing in his pain,
Was brooding ghoul-like, o'er the coming woe&mdash;
Still did he in his teeth the bold defiance throw.

Upon the chieftain's quivering lip there rose
The curl of scorn, revenge's livid hue:
His fevered eyelids dropped, with rapid close,
O'er the full orb of deep and piercing blue.
He could no longer now that pang subdue,
Which, like a whirlwind, swept his reeling brain.
Through him the ignited spark of vengeance flew,
And life's warm currents through each swelling vein
Danced with tempestuous rage, but rage suppressed his pain.

His tawny cheek grew deadly, for the gush
Of fevered blood pressed back upon the heart,
Where now it boiled, until, with sudden rush,
The bubbling current bounded from the part
Which gave it life and energy.  The start
To boisterous undulation swelled his breast:
From his strained eye such angry flashes dart
As scare the timid bosom from its rest,
And wake to fearful thoughts which may not be expressed.

While fury did in either breast ferment,
And each with weapon of destruction armed,
To a near spot of level turf they went
Which old Eumenes and his daughter farmed.
No qualms of terror Edgar's soul alarmed,
But the stern purpose fired his steady eye,
Which &mdash; for unwonted ire his spirit warmed&mdash;
Was lighted with determined energy,
That spoke a firm resolve to vanquish or to die.

A gloomy cloud hung o'er each adverse brow,
And each the other eyed with fierce disdain:
No further words escaped their lips, and now,
Sullen and mute, they reach the fatal plain.
The centre soon, with hurried steps, they gain,
And the brief distance pace with eager stride
Now ready for the fray they both remain,
Eight steps between, and, standing side to side,
At one accursed discharge the bloody strife decide.

The aim of Edgar missed &mdash; his wily foe
With surer hand the fatal trigger drew;
Loud burst the deadly harbinger of woe,
And, winged with fate, the rapid bullet flew,
Piercing the honest heart of Edgar through.
Prone on the earth he fell, no more to rise,
Whilst o'er his features stole death's pallid hue
A gathering mist o'erspread his closing eyes,
And the quick gasp proclaimed his inward agonies.

"Bertha, farewell!  here death his blossom nips
"Who loved thee more than life," he softly sighed;
The sound still murmured on his trembling lips,
When his eye met the frown of Akenside.
Dimly he saw the monster's smile deride
His melancholy plight, and felt it sore:
With effort vain to gain his feet he tried,
But with his struggles welled afresh the gore&mdash;
Life's fading spark expired &mdash; he looked &mdash; he breathed no more.

"Fool!"  cried the scoffer, &mdash; "fool!  thou hast thy meed
Where now thy scorn, insulter?  lie thou there&mdash;
'Tis my soul's banquet to behold thee bleed.
Where was thy prudence, this bold arm to dare,
Which ne'er was known a willing foe to spare
That braved its prowess?  Thou art not the first
Whom it has sent &mdash; to me no matter where&mdash;
But hear it, heaven! &mdash; may yet thy soul be curst,
For I detest thee still, though death has done his worst."

The sapling oak his hardy stem uprears,
And braves the direst horrors of the storm;
Each fierce extreme of heat and cold he bears,
And, though the frost of winter may deform
His young and lusty arms, yet, kindly warm,
The summer calls new beauties forth to view:&mdash;
But, levelled by the woodman's sinewy arm,
His verdant honours now the earth o'erstrew,
Nor shall the vigorous spring those honours e'er renew.

So perished Edgar, &mdash; so at length he fell
In the fall pride of beauty and of youth:
His murderer gave him curses for his knell,
And as he gazed upon that brow, in sooth
From which death could not strike the lines of truth,
His eyes were lit with triumph's fearful glare;
But, though he recked not, conscience has no ruth,
Nor ever will the guilty bosom spare,
For who can still remorse &mdash; the worm that riots there?

The work of death was done; yet vengeance still,
Like a starved jackal, gloated o'er the dead,
And on the feast of slaughter gorged her fill;
But the same wreath that hinds the victor's head
Shall leave its thorns upon his sleepless bed.
How will he shudder at this deed of blood
When busy memory stirs, and hideous dread
Fires the bewildered brain! &mdash; the withered bud
Of peace shall rot within, and taint life's turbid flood.

The hour must come when guilt shall have its due,
And curse its prompt activity in crime.
Yet shall the criminal in anguish rue
His foul misdeeds, and, at the doom of time,
With outcast spirits swell the wailing chime.
Short is the triumph here &mdash; the time shall be
When virtue, glittering in her glory's prime,
Shall trample on the neck of vice, and see
Just retribution overtake impiety.

Like those fair fruits upon the deadly shore
Of that dark sea, where Jordan rolls her tides,
Whose bright external promises a store
Of fragrance, while within them there abides
Ashes &mdash; man's element &mdash; and ill betides
The wretch who plucks and eats; &mdash; so, specious vice
Presents her blooming fruitage, but it hides
Curses within the core:  like polar ice
Its juices chill the soul, and mar its paradise.

Upon the gory plain the murderer stood,
While gathered round his curling lips the smile
That told his relish of the feast of blood
On which his heart now glutted:  foully vile,
As the kite hovers o'er a funeral pile,
He stood, and drank his fill of deadly glee
Within his stung and bitter breast the while
The passions clashed, and struggled to be free&mdash;
And all within him now was one wild anarchy.

Upon his brain enrapturing visions rise
Of love, the sweetest guerdon of success.
On the cold sward that hated rival lies
Whom now fair Bertha's hand could never bless.
His upturned lips the horrid joy express
Which his dark thoughts o'erpassed, and for the while
He madly gloried in its proud excess.
On his swarth features plays the withering smile,
Which in his angry gall repels the rising bile.

Bertha, while anxious hopes and fears rose high
Within her, heard at length the deathful sound:
Dread in her step and terror in her eye,
She gained, with frantic speed, the fatal ground.
The blood still trickled from the gaping wound
In Edgar's bosom; to his aid she rushed
To staunch the gore that dyed his garments round.
Upon his breast the curdling crimson blushed,
And on his faded lips the last long sigh was hushed.

The maid, with trembling hand, unclosed his vest,
The palpitations of his heart to try;
She placed her burning palm upon his breast,
But life had passed its narrow boundary.
She threw a glance of silent agony
Upon those lineaments where lately played
The smiles of joy and love:  her frenzied cry
He heard not now &mdash; "I'll follow thee!"  she said,
And with emotion wild embraced the unconscious dead.

Thus the pale snow-drop on the frosted plain
Bows its fair crest beneath the wintry blast;
The vernal shower shall fall henceforth in vain&mdash;
A fatal blight has nipped its roots at last,
And all its beauty shall be soon o'erpast.
So Bertha drooped; aside her locks she flung,
And gazed upon the form before her cast,&mdash;
Now o'er the lifeless clay despairing hung,
And poured these piteous accents wildly from her tongue:

"My Edgar!  yes &mdash; I hear thy seraph voice
That summons me to meet thy soul above,
Where kindred spirits mingle, and rejoice
Before the presence of eternal love.
How will yon man of blood hereafter prove
His innocence, when heaven demands his plea!
Guilt shall his forfeit spirit then remove
Into that penal gulf, where, never free,
The damned endure their chains &mdash; the meed of infamy.

"Aye, thou shalt one day shudder at thy crimes,"
Turning to Akenside, she wildly said.
"Send thy name blacker down to future times,
And number Bertha also with the dead.
In thee the sight of death begets no dread;
Make then the record of thy crimes complete&mdash;
Direct a bullet through this weaker head,
And spurn my reeking corse beneath thy feet,
For to thy monstrous palate human blood is sweet."

Unmoved he listened to the frantic tone,
Still unrelaxed his brow and fierce his eye
The rack-torn sufferer had forgot his own,
Had he beheld her mightier agony.
She gasped &mdash; her wild gaze fixed upon the sky&mdash;
And sobs of anguish choked her labouring breath:
In her throat rattled the convulsive cry,
While to her skin rushed up the taint of death&mdash;
Let those conceive her pangs whom sorrow maddeneth.

The stubborn cord of grief was strained too high&mdash;
It snapped, and Bertha bowed her head and died.
When from her breast escaped the long-drawn sigh,
It roused the unfeeling soul of Akenside.
With frown relaxed the lovely corpse he eyed,
And his heart's adamant began to melt:
Pity its native sternness now defied,
And, spite his cruelty, for once he felt
His rigid pride bewrayed, his shock of sorrow dealt.

There is a moment to the guilty one
When each fell passion startles from its rest,
And leaves to contemplation's eye alone
The dark and troubled spirit of the breast.
There is a moment to the dire unblest
When all the potent energies of ill
Shrink palsied back from sin's accursed behest&mdash;
When all her imps are mute, against their will,
And through the hardened frame is felt the softening thrill.

Picture the sinner in that gloomy hour
When sleep, a banished guest, deserts his bed,&mdash;
When dreams, like phantoms of infernal power,
Usurp his waking thoughts, and o'er his head
Roll the big drops of horror, as the dread
Of retribution through his wrung frame creeps.
Where is the man whose bosom never bled
When stung by keen remorse &mdash; that never sleeps,
But o'er the vicious soul her constant vigil keeps?

Absorbed in reverie the murderer stood,
Pondering the niggard harvest of his crime;
Along his veins danced the tumultuous blood
As memory rung within its dismal chime.
Guilt had now passed with him beyond the prime,
And calm reflection opened on his brain
That world which lies beyond the course of time.
He felt the sudden lash of inward pain,
But pride soon stilled the throe, and roused his high disdain.

Fond mortal!  will thy pride avail thee when
Man's universal creditor appears
To claim his bond?  Alas!  no refuge then
Will ope before thee in this vale of tears!&mdash;
What will be his forebodings when he hears
The last dread summons!  Terror's phantom crew
Will howl their frightful discord in his ears:
Hope's star will set upon his fading view,
And as his soul escapes, despair will e'er pursue.

Remorseless still, like a bleak, blasted rock
Frowning amid the desert, stood the chief:
It seemed as if the rending earthquake's shock
Alone could move him; not a sign of grief
Relaxed his marble lineaments; but brief
His exultation!  At his final hour
Where will his festered conscience seek relief?
Before the great arch-leveller must cower
The strong &mdash; the pride of valour, and the pomp of power.

The father waited for his child till near
The western main the sun began to glide;
Then patience sickened, and foreboding fear
A burning flush, a quicker pulse supplied.
To the sad scene of death at length he hied,
Where, like grim Satan, lowering o'er his prey,
He met the deadly frown of Akenside;
And rushing where the breathless lovers lay,
To the fierce bursts of woe gave unresisted way:

"The hour of retribution must be nigh
When deeds of darkness thus appal mankind,&mdash;
When death's fell engine, steeped in murder's dye,
Loads with its victim's groans the passing wind!
Ye friendly lightnings, flash and strike me blind,
That I may view no more this piteous sight!
My brain is bursting, darkness clouds my mind,
My senses reel, my day is turned to night;
Avaunt, thou man of blood!  thou devil's proselyte!

"Hast thou not killed my daughter, slain my son,
And stirred woe's poisons in my draught of joy?
Pause ere thy mad career of guilt be run,
And on thy soul thy remnant hours employ.
Vice with thy blood has mixed its worst alloy,
And stamped thee demon in his direst form:
Thy worst is done &mdash; thou canst no more annoy;&mdash;
Knit not those brows, I dread no further storm,
I'm past the power of ill, and smile at threatened harm.

"Oh!  how the sinning of my early years
Is punished now!  May the Lord's will be done!
'Tis just that I should expiate in tears
A crime, whose deep and damning taint has run
Through my whole track of life; but still its sun
Was clear and bright above me, till the stroke,
Dealt by yon murderer, has my peace undone:
From its long dream I have at length awoke&mdash;
On me a curse has fallen &mdash; the spell of hope is broke."

Here ceased the wretched sire; but to his cry
The ruthless man of slaughter gave no heed:
The unrelaxed expression of his eye
Told how his haughty mind approved the deed.
Vainly to one might heavenly pity plead
Whose heart was closed against her soft appeal;
It had been now far too long seared to bleed,
And, like &mdash; in truth, too like &mdash; the tempered steel,
It could inflict a wound itself could never feel.

Was this thy triumph, homicide?  Alas!
It is the triumph of a guilty soul,
By which 'twill only the more surely pass
To the long horrors of that fiery goal
At which its course must terminate; the whole
Of a long life were time too short to close
The scars of guilt which sear thee o'er; her bowl
Has been too deeply quaffed to 'scape the throes
Which must thy spirit rack, if cast from heaven's repose.

To Wallace did the tale of terror run,
Who on the wings of vengeance reached the ground
Where murder his appalling work had done.
He gazed distracted on the gaping wound,
Where now the livid gore had curdled round;&mdash;
That form was blanched in death, in the glazed eye
There was no lustre of expression found.
His pale cheek glowed &mdash; his lagging pulse grew high,
And his hot breath escaped in many a groaning sigh.

There lay the lifeless body, stiff and cold,
Of one whom he had loved in early days,
When the young bosom was of plastic mould,
And love and nature followed the same ways.
Awakened memory to his mind conveys
All the delightful scenes of former years;
And as o'er by-gone hours remembrance strays,
The moan breaks forth; for all that life endears
Had passed, and ceased to flow the fountain of his tears.

But horror had a mightier shock to deal!
Lo, where in mute astonishment he stands,
His eyes fixed wildly; then with maddening reel
He rushes to the object!  Now his hands
Clasp the cold form; no more a soul expands
That still fair clay-long loved, though loved in vain!
Now starts the tear &mdash; a shower o'er desert sands&mdash;
To mitigate the rising throes of pain,
And on the crimson pasture falls like winter rain.

Still was she beautiful in death; a smile
Is on her lips, and on her cheek a hue
Of moonlight loveliness, as if, the while,
You could behold her spotless spirit through.
Around the living frame that spirit drew
A halo from its own pure essence, where,
The clime so kindred, heaven's own virtues grew.
Fair in her life, in death she was as fair&mdash;
Now 'mid yon skies a star to shine for ever there.

Oh!  what a sight for one whose bosom still
Felt all that could be felt of tenderness,
In which yet unforgotten feelings thrill,
Though hope was banished from its drear recess.
The dregs of grief, in all their bitterness,
Were here stirred up anew, and every vein
Swelled with the tortures of his keen distress;
Past recollections rushed upon his brain,
And harrowed up his soul with deep and maddening pain.

Long had the swell of passion calmed, but still
The root of love lay buried deep within:
Time had to disappointment warped the will,
And kept rebellious nature free from sin.
But when the scene where murder's work had been,
Burst on his sight, the thought of happier days
Passed quickly o'er his aching mind, wherein
The sad and various parts misfortune plays
Are pictured, darkly true, 'mid life's bewildering maze.

Aye, he remembers well that jocund time
When not a care disturbed him, &mdash; when the day
Was cloudless, in his childhood's buoyant prime,
And happiness diffused its brightest ray:
But those fair moments long have passed away,
While to his view woe's gloomy phantoms rise;
They were too sullen for such joys to stay&mdash;
Those joys have sped to worlds beyond the skies,
Where they shall ever bloom in heaven's own paradise.

He that loves truly once must love for ever,
At least till death shall end his earthly race;
Disease may cramp the soul, the body shiver,
But, 'mid the wreck, there still remains a trace
Upon the heart, and which the hurried pace
Of time shall ne'er wear out, while the mind's eye
Can all the actions of the past embrace.
Pure love, once fixed within, can never die,
But, where its fixes, clings &mdash; its nurse the memory.

Alas!  to love where loving nought endears&mdash;
To yield the heart's best tribute unrequited&mdash;
To wither in the very prime of years,
With all our hopes and all our wishes blighted&mdash;
This is indeed to suffer; to be slighted
By one whom the soul doats on, and to roam,
Like a poor wanderer through the world, benighted,
Unpitied and unmourned: &mdash; love finds a home
Within the bosom still, its birthplace and its tomb.

At length the lifeless bodies were conveyed
To the lone cottage, where their infant years
Had passed in innocence, and there arrayed
In death's dull pageantry:  the honest tears
Of humble clowns were dropped upon their biers,
And their bones rested in one common grave.
They were not greeted by those scornful sneers
Which hail the tyrant great, the ignobly brave&mdash;
Love o'er their ashes wept, and joined the burial stave.

To follow to the dark and silent tomb
The mute remains of all we loved on earth,
Is a most fearful duty!  when the womb
Of the dank grave shuts o'er them, and the dearth
Of tears &mdash; to which fierce grief refuses birth&mdash;
Is like a burning drought upon the heart.
When the gaunt sexton, with a song of mirth,
Piles the damp clay, how does the life's blood start
Through the distending veins, and burn in every part!

Death!  what a harsh arbitrament is thine!
Alike on all, thy murky shades descend,
And all the glorious works of heaven combine
To ratify those powers, which often rend
Nature's capacious womb!  How oft the end
Of life by thy chill breath is "sicklied o'er!"
Why not, when summoned, visit like a friend?
Strike not with anger stern, with torment sore,
And shock the struggling soul with wild alarms no more.

Death is a fearful sight!  the great and good
Oft look upon him with an awful dread.
Howe'er sin's evils may have been withstood,
There is a something o'er his aspect spread
That hangs a load upon the soul, like lead,
And weighs the spirit down; it is a fear
Which nature can't expel &mdash; our hearts are wed
To the strong impulse:  but it ceases here&mdash;
Death wafts us to those realms, where he shall ne'er appear.

Stupendous thought!  that when exhausted time
No more shall bear us on his eager wings&mdash;
No more the body brave this noxious clime
To which the sensual spirit only clings;
Then the pure soul to brighter regions springs,
And, where the fountains of eternal light
Gush in accordance with celestial strings,
Shall freely quaff, in God's approving sight,
The exhaustless streams of bliss with sateless appetite.

Who then would miss the heavenly paradise,
Where, 'mid the fount of everlasting day,
Blooms life's perennial tree, whose fruits suffice
To fill with fragrant bliss the etherial way,
Plucked by seraphic hands?  Then why delay,
Rash mortal, to prepare thy spirit's flight
For those unearthly realms?  Why lingering stay
'Neath vice's scorching sun?  A horrid night
Will o'er its setting close, its rise however bright.

When Wallace had beheld the unconscious clay
At length to its sepulchral home consigned,
To guilt's abode he bent his eager way,
Big with the purpose of a manly mind.
Though Bertha to his love had proved unkind,
Her dear remembrance in his heart was cherished:&mdash;
That love, whose treacherous joys he had resigned,
Although neglected long, still wildly flourished
As vines, which fuller grow the less by culture nourished.

He found the tyrant lowering, dark and grim,
Like the hyena o'er the dead man's grave,
And nigh advancing, thus accosted him:
"Behold me here &mdash; no base and crouching slave,
But the weak champion of the murdered brave,
And armed for vengeance:  vantageless I stand
To dare in mortal strife the recreant knave
Still foul with murder:  by thy guilty band
To fall, or, conquering thee, purge this polluted land."

The chieftain's eyes flashed fire, his lips grew pale,
And the big veins upon his wrinkled brow
Swelled nigh to bursting:  like a turgid whale,
Wounded by some huge vessel's pointed prow,
And floundering from the torment of the blow,
He rolled in agony, while to his cheek
The crimson current rushed with fiery glow.
He now prepared a new revenge to seek,
And on another's head his desperate wrath to wreak.

"Take then thy guerdon, madman," he replied,
"And if thou'rt asked who sent thy soul to hell,
Say 'twas thy reckless murderer Akenside,
Who never failed to feed the devil well
When lowly drones against him dared rebel.
Your life has reached its term, and, whilst you may,
Count o'er your beads, your pater-nosters tell.
Ne'er shall those eyes behold again the day,
For death has marked thee now, and here demands his prey."

This said, he drew his weapon from its sheath,
And rushed on Wallace, foaming in his ire:
The wary champion shunned the menaced death,
And back, with cautious footsteps, did retire,
Parrying the adverse weapon, till the fire
Of rage fatigue had slaked; then, marking well
The vengeful foe, as he began to tire,
Plunged in his breast the blade; &mdash; with sudden yell
The tyrant met his fate &mdash; then staggered, groaned, and fell.

From his swarth brow the glowing crimson rushed&mdash;
His closing eye the fiery lustre fled:
Through his gored breast the ruddy torrent gushed,
And on his bosom sunk the drooping head.
A pale unearthly hue succeeds the red
Upon his ghastly lips &mdash; an ashy white!
The fierce convulsive gasp at length betrayed
The struggles of his soul for its last flight
To the Cimmerian realms of everlasting night.

"Fiends claim their own," in hurried tone he cried,
"And curses on the chance that forced &mdash; the claim!
Had not my arm its wonted skill denied,
Thy slavish heart had not escaped its aim.
Could I but see thy life's blood gush the same
As mine now gushes from its ebbing spring,
Gladly my soul would go &mdash; to whence it came;
For the worst pang the thought of death can bring
Is, that I leave on earth my victor triumphing.

"Nay, come not nigh me, &mdash; 'tis a curse to die
When those we loathe behold the expiring throe;
What is the body's simple agony
To what the mind's then doomed to undergo!
My rack of feeling none but those can know
Whom vice has hardened in her baleful creed:
To what strange rest my spirit now may go,
I know not &mdash; but could I behold thee bleed&mdash;"
Death stopped his further speech, and the foul spirit freed.

Thus died the homicide, whose little span
Had been one scene of infamy and crime.
No friendly tear deplored the wretched man&mdash;
His soul no more floats on the stream of time,
But wanders in eternity &mdash; my rhyme
Cannot pursue him there; yet while his corse
Did with its tainted gore the earth begrime,
The general song of triumph, loud and hoarse,
Burst from unnumbered throats, and burst without remorse.

There were rejoicings then from every tongue,
Both slave and free, within his wide domain;
No eye was moistened, and no heart was wrung,
When it was bruited that their lord was slain.
The hardy caffer, as he shook his chain,
Sent up his shouts of gladness to the skies
Hope seemed to brighten o'er his soul again,
And the warm transport gathered in his eyes,
As from their new-oped source her lovely visions rise.

Wallace withdrew, and left the reeking clay
Without one sigh of pity for its fate.
Those halls which erst with revelry were gay,
By man deserted, soon grew desolate.
Within those halls did vampyres congregate,
Where once a Raphael's noblest efforts hung;
There on its lonely throne dumb ruin sate,
And o'er the crumbling pile its mischiefs flung&mdash;
There after-crimes had birth which must remain unsung.

Eumenes lived, but from his fevered brain
The bright and vivid ray of mind withdrew;
Neglect now held her empire o'er the plain
Where once the lovely stores of Flora grew:
There the rude blast of desolation blew,
And on the cottage croaked the bird of death;
The night-shade, meet companion to the yew,
Spread its obnoxious foliage o'er the heath,
Where fragrant blooms had blown, and shed their balmy breath.

The valley's pride is gone, the mountain flower,
Nipped by the blast, has withered in its prime:
Virtue and beauty perished in that hour
Which hurried Bertha from this world of crime.
Now, brighter than &mdash; the sun, in that pure clime
Where seraphs hail her 'mid their glorious throng,
She dwells, removed beyond the power of time:
There round God's throne, his glorying saints among,
Joining the heavenly choir, she pours the eternal song.

Wallace, whose force of grief was unsubdued,
Assumed the monkish cassock and the cowl;
Still love possessed his heart, but with his blood
Disease fast mingled:  when the midnight owl
Screeched to the moon, and, with discordant howl,
Roamed forth the beast of prey, he'd rise from sleep
And lash his sides in penance, till the growl
Of pain supprest from his parched lips would leap,
For in his cankered breast the sting of woe was deep.

He cast himself within the cloister's gloom
A blighted, solitary thing, to die
Unknown and unlamented:  what a doom
For one still fresh in years!  the hollow eye,
The pale, sunk cheek, the forehead's sallow dye,
The tottering gait, the frail and withered limb,
Proclaim what has been the soul's agony.
How sad a change had sorrow wrought in him,
Whose frame no weakness knew, ere pleasure's light was dim.

Over a time-worn missal would he pore,
Till at his window hummed the early bee,
And count, with untired labour, o'er and o'er
The numbered circles of his rosary.
He shrunk from every sound of social glee,
And from all earthly cares detached his mind;&mdash;
Upon his visions dawned eternity,
On whose untracked expanse he hoped to find
Joys that shall much o'erweigh the sorrows left behind.

Wrapt in the sullen silence of his cell
Where the black spider spun his filmy pall,&mdash;
Its frightful gloom all but a type of hell,&mdash;
He wrenched his thoughts from this terrestrial ball,
To which they still would cling, as if in thrall
To some resistless agency:  no light
Of comfort burst upon his darkness; all
Around him was a long and rayless night,
And heaven itself but opened dimly on his sight.

And does Religion such a terror prove
To those she gathers 'neath her sacred wings?
No!  she's the herald of celestial love,
And every blessing from her bosom springs:
But 'mid the cloister sought, where darkly flings
Its terrors, superstition, not a tone
Of her soft harmony is heard; the strings
Of her sweet harp, there broken, breathe a moan
Which from the wrung heart draws despair's unhallowed groan.

But o'er our heads, as life's swift moments glide,
She, if unfettered, &mdash; pointing to the shore
Where, when we've past o'er time's precarious tide,
The storms of sorrow can assail no more,&mdash;
Conducts us safely through the angry roar
Of the fierce hurricanes that round us blare,
And guides us where our souls may safely soar
Beyond the strife of elements; and where
"The wicked cease from troubling," rest the weary there.

Poor Wallace now, a gloomy devotee,
Blindly pursued where superstition led:
His food was coarse &mdash; he tasted sparingly&mdash;
Sackcloth his clothing, and the flint his bed.
Soon the scant locks upon his uncombed head
Grew white, and, withering, left the shrunk scalp bare:
On all around he looked with holy dread,
As if pollution's taint was everywhere,
And but the cursed on earth could heaven's pure blessings share.

Behold the swallow in the summer sun
Disporting in its bright and fervid ray!
All was resplendence when the morn begun,
But storms and thunders darken o'er the day
Around the heavens' the vivid lightnings play,
Whilst o'er the land the streaming torrents pour;
At length, a victim to the deathful fray,
No longer 'mid the azure plains he'll soar,
But on the green sward lies, nor hears the tempest's roar.

On earth has peace no sure abiding-place!
Here may she sometimes dwell, and for awhile
Strew flowers before us in our earthly race;
But soon &mdash; too soon, alas! &mdash; her placid smile
Contracts to frowns austere, and o'er the pile
Of blighted hopes she flickers and expires.
How does the present oft our thoughts beguile!
Yet while the soul to future joys aspires,
Woe lights her torch within, and fans the kindling fires.

But is this world our everlasting rest?
"Strangers and pilgrims" only are we here,
"Seeking a better country," where the blest
Shall hail our coming with a rapturous cheer,
Which, whilst its music charms the immortal ear,
Shall spread its echoes round the radiant skies
There never shall the trembling voice of fear
Pour its wild wailings.  Mortal!  sorrow tries
And proves the heart, but as she proves it, purifies.

