Beyond the wood that screened Eumenes' cot
Young Wallace lived, a youth of goodly kin;
Fortune had marked with competence his lot,
And though the beard now darkened on his chin
His life had 'scaped the deadlier taint of sin.
Edgar and Wallace knew each other well&mdash;
Each did the other's heart to friendship win;&mdash;
How bland their feelings, they alone may tell
Who have confessed the force of friendship's powerful spell.

How tender are her soothings when within
Those warm emotions rise and live and glow&mdash;
Free from the noisome feculence of sin&mdash;
Which they of gentle spirit only know!
The milk of human kindness sweetens so
The heart's asperities, the bitter feud,
When friendship's blossoms in the bosom grow;
That God's own image seems to be renewed,
Whose brightness in our souls transgression had subdued.

Oh!  what were man, if friendship never threw
Her halo round his destiny's pale star?
If he her sweet sensations never knew,
He ne'er could tell what this world's blessings are:
And, but for her, how would its sorrows mar,
With shadows dark, the sunshine of his years!
Full oft she ruptures misery's rigid bar,
Casting a lustre o'er misfortune's tears,
Sooths the dejected soul, and brightens as she cheers!

Wallace and Edgar, in their childhood's prime,
Had interchanged the pledges of esteem:
Their young hearts, each as glowing as their clime,
Had warmed and ripened in affection's beam.
As both together down time's gentle stream
Held their smooth course beneath the sparkling ray
Of boyhood's cheerful sunshine, hope's fair dream
Spread like the light of truth before their way,
And not a cloud arose to shade their youthful day.

Both were of equal age, and neither had
Brother or sister his regards to share.
In this their lot was anything but sad,
For oft &mdash; too oft, alas! &mdash; the thorns of care
In kindred bosoms fix, and, festering there,
Taint all the finer feelings of the soul.
The links of love oft snap, and lack repair;
But severed once, disunion mars the whole&mdash;
Released affection flies, and mocks the will's control.

They had been much in early youth together,
And their young friendships strengthened with their years.
As the bright orb of day in April weather
Smiles o'er the face of nature through her tears,
So did the love of each, above his peers,
Break through the transient gloom of youthful sorrow,
Nor had time quenched it yet; it still appears
From his subverting hand new strength to borrow,
And warmer feelings grow with each succeeding morrow.

Beyond the millions of his fellow men
Nature had deigned to Wallace nothing rare;
No muse had held him subject for her pen,
Nor had the sculptor deemed him worth his care.
But though his form was not beyond compare,
His mind was pure, unwarped by fierce desire;
Virtue had left her best impressions there,
And, though to genius he could ne'er aspire,
There still was in him much to cherish and admire.

Seldom had Wallace from his native glen
Emerged to mingle with the courtly throng;
Yet though untutored in the ways of men,
He could acutely judge 'twixt right and wrong.
Brought up to rural habitudes, the song
Of the fair peasant had for him a charm
Too rarely found your high-bred maids among.
The rough yet healthy pastimes of the farm
Furnished his boyish sports, but these were free from harm.

The lofty pageantries, the vain parade
Of wealth, he looked on as that gaudy glare
Which only glitters for a while, to fade
When spots or canker shall have gathered there:
As rusts the steel, in spite of every care,
So wealth's factitious splendours must grow dim:
The ills of life beset them everywhere,
And therefore they possessed no charms for him,
While life's move homely cup was sweetened to the brim.

Oft would he mingle with the rustic throng,
And merrily partake their noisy glee,
Thread the rude dance, or join the festive song
With right good will &mdash; with spirit light and free.
Toil was his exercise; in labour he
Secured at once his profit, pleasure, health&mdash;
Life's best, though far least valued, property&mdash;
And which he prized above all earthly wealth,
Though oft it slips our grasp, like a false friend, by stealth.

Wallace was blessed with an abundant share,
And what he had he prized; his hardy frame
Evinced that vice had not yet harboured there.
By nought disturbed, content where'er he came&mdash;
Whether in sunshine or in storm, the same&mdash;
No change of season wrought a change in him:
A manly form was his ambitious aim,
Hoping that health, with strength of nerve and limb,
Would keep woe's harpies off till life's bright spark grew dim.

Acquirements he had few, but still was read
In all the lighter lore of modern days,
For prosing pedagogues had stored his head
Enough to fix the clown's unstinted praise.
He felt his brows unsuited for the bays
Which genius boldly wreathes around his own;
Yet he pursued those unfrequented ways
That lead to virtue's shunned but blissful throne&mdash;
Wit gains no choice with her &mdash; the heart is prized alone.

His heart was worth the prizing; it was stored
With all that renders hearts of worth to man;
Religion's image there was deeply scored,
For, as his infancy's career he ran,
Her lovely buddings in his soul began:
As he pressed onward in the race of years,
He grew the darling leader of his clan;
And whilst his bark through life's calm sea he steers,
She to the haven points, and greets him with her cheers.

He had a mother, and she claimed a care
Which he, with filial tenderness, supplied.
With years decrepit now, she felt aware
That death must soon her wasting powers deride.
The tender son his best endeavours tried
To smooth her passage to that doubtful bourne,
Where, 'mid the gorgeous wrecks of mortal pride,
Monarchs and slaves shall meet &mdash; whence none return;
But which all flesh must pass, to triumph or to mourn.

Wallace was owner of a house, and land
That more than answered life's necessities:
Three hundred slaves acknowledged his command,
Who lived ungalled by crushing tyrannies.
They never knew those stern severities
Which the swarth bondman suffers in his chains;
Their master felt those near equalities
Which heaven 'twixt lord and humbler slave ordains:
He studied well their weal &mdash; their love endeared his pains.

E'en bondage may be free from wretchedness,
When they who lord it o'er their fellow men
Can pity and be kind; for sorrowless
Might be the roughest life, if, from her den,
Oppression ne'er stalked forth to crush; but when
Man plays the brute with that most abject race
Who writhe beneath the scourge of slavery, then,
Like an impetuous courser in the race,
Peace from the bosom flies with quick and fearful pace.

Wallace was loved by all; the palsying thought
Of thraldom ne'er untranquillized their mind:
In rusted heaps their fetters lay unsought,
And the tough thong, for bloody stripes designed,
Was flung, an useless agent, to the wind.
Still Wallace was unblessed; within him now
Awoke a feeling, new and undefined:
Time scarce had written man upon his brow,
When to the force of love his heart began to bow.

It is a fearful time when youth begins
By nature's law to ripen into man;
'Tis then that busy vice so slily spins
Her most insidious web-accursed plan!
Within whose meshes caught, no mortal can
Free the snared victim:  it is God alone
Can drag him from the hag's tenacious span.
But Wallace knew her not; to virtue prone,
His bosom was her shrine &mdash; her feelings were his own.

He felt his heart assailed, yet dared not tell
The tender secret to that only ear
To which he wished it known:  a sacred spell
Kept his tongue mute; a delicate, anxious fear,
When the fair object of his love was near,
Crept through his frame, and checked his bounding blood.
Oft when he chanced her sweet soft voice to hear,
In mute but awkward consciousness he stood,
Whilst to his burning cheeks rushed up the crimson flood.

He spoke not, but the flush upon his cheek
Was the true earnest of a smitten heart;
And though he dared not trust his tongue to speak,
His beaming eye did all he felt impart.
From the full fountain of his breast would start
The vital stream, and through his ardent frame
Spread, till his body glowed in every part;
And yet when his love's idol near him came,
His passion's fire was quenched &mdash; his very soul grew tame.

In nuptial schemes his idler hours were spent
Long had he looked on Bertha with an eye
That told his secret, mutely eloquent;
How would he heave the half-resisted sigh
When the fair object of his love was nigh!
But she regarded not the doting swain;&mdash;
Yet when the dear tormentor passed him by,
He'd gaze and blush, then gaze and blush again&mdash;
His looks met no return, his blushes burned in vain.

Oft in his pregnant fancy would he rear
Fantastic fabrics in the smiling skies,
Till these bewitching visions would appear
With all the clearness of realities.
O'er his young brain, the fond ideas rise,
Till the rapt spirit kindles as they glow:
Hope, pointing to the goal, displays the prize,
But disappointment, her insidious foe,
Shall snatch it from his grasp, and triumph at his woe.

What transport thus our eager thoughts to fling
Into the mighty void, and there to trace
Upon imagination's buoyant wing
Her bright creations, and to roll through space
Above yon burning suns, whose orbs embrace
Regions beyond the firmament &mdash; to soar,
And build, where we can find no resting-place,
Fancy's fair structures! &mdash; When she smiles no more,
Then welcome death, for this world's happiness is o'er.

Bertha, unconscious of her power to wring
Another's bosom, smiled whene'er she viewed
Her unsuccessful lover languishing;
And oft, with banter kind and whisper shrewd,
His passion rallied; still did there intrude
No thought of self upon her artless mind;
She was too innocent to play the prude,
And deemed that Wallace had his heart resigned
To some Arcadian maid to whom that heart inclined.

He let concealment, "like a worm i' th' bud,"
Prey on his sallow cheek, nor ever told
Whose charms had from it forced the mantling blood.
Silence and he grew social; as he strolled
In mute abstraction o'er the neighbouring wold,
Hope less distinctly tantalized his view;
But dazzling visions still before it rolled,
Beckoning capricious fancy to pursue&mdash;
When fear's gaunt image rose, and chased the phantom crew.

'Ts but a treacherous pleasure when we blind
Our feelings to a dread reality&mdash;
When o'er the quickly apprehensive mind
We cast delusion's veil, and from the eye
Of keen conviction diligently try
To hide the stubborn truth: &mdash; vain cozenage!
Sooner or later comes the certainty
Of all we dreaded; when within us rage
Pangs that with double might against our peace engage.

Ah!  what a struggle now 'twixt hopes and fears
Disturbed his daily quiet!  As a stream
That's ruffled by the storm, no more appears
To bask and wanton in the solar beam;
So he, awakened from love's halcyon dream,
Now revels in the light of joy no more:
To him alike all this world's prospects seem,
Although they had so sweetly smiled before;
For love has wrenched his heart &mdash; its day of bliss is o'er.

There was a secret monitor within
Which whispered comfort in the midst of pain;
Yet 'twas unheeded, for he could not win
His bosom's banished inmate back again.
He ne'er was heard, though wretched, to complain,
But sighed in silence, and in silence wept:
Grief, which there held an undisputed reign,
Ceased not her torments even when he slept,
But still by day and night a fixed possession kept.

As near the deep some solitary bird
Perched on the beetling cliff, with drooping wing
Struck by the fowler's gun &mdash; its moans unheard&mdash;
The fretted waves beneath it bellowing,&mdash;
Regardless, as on high their foam they fling&mdash;
Its plumage ruffled, and relaxed its eye,&mdash;
Above, around, the fierce storm blustering
Breaks not its stern repose, &mdash; no refuge nigh,
It stands upon the bleak and barren rock to die.

So Wallace, shunning each familiar face,
Stood, like the desert palm, alone and sad,
Whilst sorrow cankered in his breast apace.
No smile played round his lips &mdash; and if there had,
'Twould have belied him, though so lately glad,
And free from every care:  the throbbing brow,
The o'erstrained heart-strings, almost drove him mad.
Death would indeed have been a blessing now,
But still the sufferer lived, and yet he recked not how.

Edgar perceived the struggles of his mind
'Twixt love and friendship, and, admiring, saw
That love, so often rash, and oftener blind,
Gained not the mastery o'er honour's law.
Though Wallace pined in secret, not a flaw
Of vicious thought had fretted on his heart:
In worldly cunning he was all too raw
To try the narrow subterfuge of art,
But met, with patient soul, affliction's bitter smart.

Bertha indeed was grieved to see the change
In one for whom she felt such high esteem:
All now was gloom and sorrow at the grange,
Where late the star of mirth diffused its beam.
She guessed not why he pined, nor could she deem
How rooted was his anguish; from her eye
The warm and sparkling tear would often stream
When, with dejected mien, he passed her by,
Or shrunk from her approach, if he beheld her nigh.

Within her, like the gentle parent dove
Upon her brood, the cherub pity lay;
For there, when glow the hallowed fires of love,
All cognate feelings are as warm as they.
Upon his burning hand her palm she'd lay,
And seek the secret of his grief to gain;
But he turned from her on his silent way,
While the fierce anguish darted through his brain,
Until the tear found vent to soothe his maddening pain.

His mother, anxious for her only boy,
Beheld with dread his mind's increasing gloom;
Grief seized her soul, and blasted all her joy.
Before her tottering footsteps yawned the tomb,
Whose ever dark and solitary womb
She felt must shortly now enclose her dust.
Yet ere she should be called to that drear home,
Where rest alike the sinner and the just,
To see her child well wed had been her constant trust.

The very slaves were troubled at his woe,
And often thronged around him as he past,
With tearful eye and quivering lip, to know
Why anguish to his spirit clung so fast:
But e'en their fondness painful grew at last,
And their officious kindness teazed him sore
To his dull ear the mutterings of the blast,
Or the wild hurricane's impetuous roar,
Was sweeter melody, and soothed his sorrows more.

He was at once a master and a friend
To these dark sons of Afric's scorching clime:
They were not forced beneath the yoke to bend
As if their slavery had been their crime.
Whatever clouds roll o'er the course of time,
There may be brightness in the dullest lot,
And &mdash; how the soul leaps at the thought sublime!&mdash;
Though happiness is not for this poor spot,
Yet bondsmen have their heaven, and kings may have it not.

To Edgar now fair Bertha's hand was plighted.
Eumenes saw, nor disapproved to see,
That love's enduring links their hearts united:
From narrow pride as from ambition free,
Wealth, nor the pomps of lordly pedigree,
Could not bribe him to do his daughter wrong;
Edgar he therefore fixed her mate should be,
And named the marriage day; nor was it long
Before the tale went round the neighbouring serfs among.

Wallace had heard the final promise given,
And, as he heard, he raised his head and sighed:&mdash;
"May the consent be ratified in heaven!"
(His eyes o'ergushing with their load,) he cried.
To tear her image from his heart he tried,
Branded by love's hot shaft; &mdash; in vain &mdash; for still
The tyrant god his niggard aid denied.
He left the cot heart-stricken, warped in will,
Whilst in his sluggish veins the lagging blood was chill.

They who have loved, when not one tender sigh
Has e'er been echoed back, will keenly feel
For others who have wept, with fevered eye,
O'er a harsh fate which time can ne'er repeal,
Unless cold apathy the breast anneal
To a stern temper, like a polar frost.
Better the warm affections should congeal
At once to ice, than, when our love is crost,
Renounce the busy world, as all its joys were lost.

Edgar was sad to mark his early friend&mdash;
The kind companion of his infant years&mdash;
Thus withering ere his prime, and sought to blend
Amusement with his griefs; for he had fears
Lest the perpetual gush of sorrow's tears
At length should burst his heart &mdash; 'twas all in vain
For soothing was but discord to his ears,
And his soul seemed as if it courted pain,
Like the poor slave who, whilst it galls him, hugs his chain.

Though to the same attraction either turned,
These early friends esteemed each other well:
Love's purest flame in both their bosoms burned,
Still friendship slept not there; nor once befell
Dispute or strife, her bland regards to quell.
The jaundiced eye of jealousy was closed,
For Wallace scorned to trust an imp so fell;
And though his friend his brightest hopes opposed,
Yet envy from his eye no baleful light disclosed.

Now that the flat of his doom was sealed,
Within him disappointment's doleful chimes
Rung like a knell:  to reason he appealed
In vain, which, howsoever it sublimes
The mind unstained by folly or by crimes,
Can ne'er restore the spirit's long-lost ease:
In spite of all its lessons, still, at times,
Grief on the disappointed heart will seize,
And with her icy gripe the kindliest feelings freeze.

Her livid glow his faded cheeks o'erspread,
His frame grew every hour more weak and spare;
Within his stormy breast joy now was dead,
Whilst hideous phantoms mocked him everywhere;
Scarce could his mind the constant conflict bear,
And on his brow the eye began to trace
Those lines which told how woe was working there.
His hair grew white and withered; not a grace
Of youth, of health, remained on that once sprightly face.

He shunned all social fellowship with men,
And to the silence of the woods withdrew,
Where through the thicket's maze, or pathless glen,
He could unchecked his sombre thoughts pursue.
He turned repulsive from the curious view
Of the lone traveller that passed him by;
Nor till his shoulders dripped with evening dew,
And the bright stars were twinkling in the sky,
Recked he of day's decline, or deemed that night was nigh.

Not e'en a mother's converse now could please&mdash;
It fell discordant on the 'wildered ear;
For what can minister to a mind's disease
When all the buddings of the heart are sere,
And hope's beguiling star has ceased to cheer?
That calm is found in solitude alone,
Where, unbeheld, may fall the soothing tear:
There could he breathe unheard his plaintive moan&mdash;
There give his sorrows vent, unheeded and unknown.

Grief is a selfish feeling; unsubdued,
It stills each livelier impulse of the heart;
'Tis nourished to excess in solitude,
And on self-torment lives and grows, apart
From all our sympathies:  the wiles of art
May sometimes rouse the slumbering energies,
But Time alone can heal the bosom's smart;
He marks the sorrower, as for peace he tries,
And, like a watchful nurse, the gradual cure supplies.

Yet are there some whom he can never heal.
There is a fixed intensity of care
Which mocks his mute but forcible appeal&mdash;
'Tis the deep sullen feeling of despair:
Oh!  how it clings around the heart, and there
Clogs all its finer springs, and tames the swell
Which rapture oft had raised, when, free as air,
The light blood bounded, and the sweet "all's well"
Chimed its mild music there to strengthen pleasure's spell!

Try what we can, e'en friendship's soothings then
Fall dissonant upon the morbid ear:
Compassion's accents are a torture, when
The bright eye's springs are void, and not a tear
Streams at the call of grief:  in sooth, to hear
Her muttered plaints excites no sympathy;
But where, no murmur heard, her traits appear
Trenched deep upon the brow, 'tis then the sigh
Of pity swells the breast &mdash; her pearl begems the eye.

Poor Wallace drooped, and, like a goodly tree
Whose roots are cramped, now showed a swift decline.
He loathed his food, or tasted sparingly,
And his sunk eyes displayed a fearful sign
How deeply woe had worked her deadly mine.
His former liveliness was all subdued,
And of his features, harsh grew every line:
No more he showed his wonted hardihood,
For her deep taint had reached the channels of his blood.

To him the sound of merriment was dire,
And others' joys but mocked his misery;
Checked was each keener impulse of desire
By the torpedo-touch of apathy.
His soul, o'erwrought by sensibility,
Sunk, jaded and oppressed with its own woes;
Nor from its dark impressions could it flee,
But seemed to court and linger on its throes,
As if his pains were joys, and he and joy were foes.

Edgar the while was confident in hope:
All his were May-day moments, ne'er o'ercast
By fear's anticipations; vast his scope
Of bliss prospective &mdash; bliss for earth too vast!
But when he saw, prostrated by the blast
Of wretchedness, his dearest, earliest friend,
All selfish feelings were at once o'erpast,
And from his livelier, pleasures he'd unbend
To ease a breaking heart, beyond his power to mend.

For he remembers well the sportive hours
Which they had spent together in the morn&mdash;
The hale fresh morn of childhood, when the powers
Of mirth were in their vigour; when the horn
Was echoed from the mountains, and the corn
Waved o'er the vallies; when their hearts were free
From cares &mdash; the lot of all of woman born,
Who plucked and eat of the forbidden tree,
Entailing thus guilt's curse on all her progeny.

To glance the ripe thoughts back upon the past
Amid the bright scenes of our years, and there
To trace, when not a single cloud o'ercast
The clear star of our hopes &mdash; is pleasure rare,
And soothing to the spirit.  To compare
What has been with what is &mdash; our young, fair days
With a still fairer manhood, and to share
The happiness of each ten thousand ways&mdash;
Imparts a double life, and swells our souls with praise.

Alas!  to one how changed the sprightly scene!
That voice which late was harmony, is mute,
Or waked to discord; now, no more serene
To him the prospect smiles; the mellowing fruit
Of bliss, ere ripe, is nipt, and of the lute,
Once tuned to mirth, the melody is o'er;
Within, the piercing throe is so acute,
That in his ear when pity's soothings pour,
Like caustic on a wound, they but inflame the more.

For the jarred mind, impatient of relief,
Spurns consolation &mdash; as a poison, spurns;
And to the blighting luxury of grief,
Against her better counsel, madly turns.
Oft as with sorrow's feverish heat it burns,
It mocks medicaments, and courts disease;
Within the dark recess of thought sojourns,
And drains the bowl of suffering to the lees,&mdash;
When on the harassed soul despair's harsh feelings seize.

While fed the love-lorn Wallace on his woes,
Edgar with Bertha passed each tranquil day:
Their cottage was the temple of repose,
And pleasure smiled their happy hours away.
The seraph joy on either bosom lay,
And, with unruffled pinion, settled there;
But who, alas!  shall reckon on his stay!
Swift as a sunbeam &mdash; if assailed by care&mdash;
He takes his instant flight to seek repose elsewhere.

