Beyond the spreading wood that skirts the dell
Where lived Eumenes, dwelt a potent lord:
O'er his domain he reigned a tyrant fell,
And those he ruled, their rigid fate deplored;
His will sole arbiter; his plea, the sword.
In vice he held a bold supremacy,
By neither good nor evil men adored;
All shunned the deathful terrors of his eye&mdash;
Lust was his only idol &mdash; guilt his deity.

Life had no joys for him but when he doomed
Some heart to woe, relentless in his spite:
On his domain no virgin blossom bloomed&mdash;
Around it spread seduction's withering blight.
Above his battlements the bird of night
Croaked in hoarse murmurs; his so fell a name
As never tongue could utter with delight:
Whene'er 'twas syllabled, the flush of shame
Upon the maiden cheek with quick suffusion came.

The tenantry who owned him as their lord
Shrunk, with chill horror, from his looks of gloom:
The thunder rolled less awful than his word.
Less dreaded was the silence of the tomb
Than his stern silence:  when he chanced to roam,
The astounded rustic shunned the tainted road:
Fear in his mansion made her constant home,
Yet trembling lurked in that accursed abode,
Where, on the wings of guilt, oppression madly rode.

There was a lurking devil in his eye,
A curl upon his lip, and on his brow
A scowl that would not give his heart the lie.
He ne'er had deigned his haughty crest to bow
To God or man; nor sought, nor cared he how
He gained his ends, if they but answered well.
Too long guilt's minion, he was callous now
Either to hope of heaven or fear of hell&mdash;
His soul was seared with crime, and vice had rung its knell.

His brain a vortex, in whose ceaseless whirl
Tossed the tempestuous passions:  as a wave
Dashing the strand, upon whose foamy curl
The young fry wreck &mdash; their cradle and their grave.
Dark were his thoughts, and turbulent; a slave
To their wild workings, demon-like, he'd brood
On deeds of death that would appal the brave;
For he delighted in the taint of blood,
And e'er, o'er desperate men, their fierce arch-devil stood.

As the gaunt wolf, with rabid hunger grim,
Steals from his murky lair, at break of day,
Where, o'er the relies of some mangled limb,
He whetted fierce his fangs; now, armed to slay,
The timid wood-tribes flee before his way,
And echo wakens to his hideous howls:
So the fell chieftain, though in vice grown gray,
Skulks from his den of guilt, and, as he prowls,
His scared retainers flee, nor dare to meet his scowls.

His menials, doomed to do his fell behests,
Fawned when he frowned, and shuddered when he smiled:
Hate was the master-feeling of their breasts,
And though they bowed submissive when reviled,
And to their lot seemed meekly reconciled,
Still their hearts tugged against their chains; but fear
Enforced obedience, and, with aspect mild,
They did their tyrant's bidding: &mdash; far and near
Strange tales of guilt went round, nor shunned the public ear.

A reckless despot, in his dark abode
Vice reigned in all her direst turpitude:
There daily her polluted cup o'erflowed
With secret venom, craftily imbued.
There oft amid the revel, coarse and rude
When passion's rein was loose and mirth was high&mdash;
Scenes of such flushed corruption had ensued
As would the rigid voice of truth defy,&mdash;
For truth was here so black, it must have seemed a lie.

Rumour too quickly to his ear conveyed
The matchless charms of old Eumenes' child;
He heard the praises of the unconscious maid,
And sudden schemes of ill his thoughts beguiled.
He saw her, though unseen, &mdash; and almost wild
With lawless love, determined her his prey;
Yet for a while his fiendish arts were foiled.
For, be the villain cunning as he may,
He'll find the price of evil often hard to pay.

Edgar had sought and won her; and their tale
Of love, provoked the tyrant's savage mood;
His sallow cheek at the report grew pale,
And rage to instant fever chafed his blood.
By all the pangs of jealousy pursued,
On Edgar's name he showered his curses down;
Those hellish schemes of villany renewed
Which raised him up to infamous renown,&mdash;
While fiercer glared his eye, and darker grew his frown.

Such are the torments of the guilty; they
Know not the blessings of the heart's repose:
Their very joys are curses, for they prey
On all that might relieve their bosom's woes,
When woes distract it: &mdash; there its poison throws
The blasting Upas, vice's baleful tree,
Upon whose boughs her deadly fruitage grows:
There frets the insatiate worm of misery&mdash;
That worm which never dies, but gnaws eternally.

The day of anxious hope, of anxious fear,
Which was to see the lovely Bertha wed,
Drew nigh:  while trembled in her eye the tear,
And, by the fair but envious graces led,
To the hoar priest, on timid feet, she sped.
The holy churchman shrived her, ere that hour
Of solemn compact; still, with fluttering dread,
She saw the day approach:  the blushing flower
Grew pale upon her cheek, and fear proclaimed its power.

There is in joy a frequent gush of pain,
For sorrow issues from the selfsame spring:
To seek enjoyment unalloyed, is vain&mdash;
The busy thoughts are ever on the wing
To torture with their own imagining.
Bertha, although she knew not why, was sad,
Nor could reflection its composure bring:
Her mind was pensive, though her heart was glad,
And certain secret fears her rising joys forbad.

Edgar had no such fears; hope's radiant beam
Mildly reflected in his sparkling eye&mdash;
As the clear sunlight in the falling stream&mdash;
Endued it with its own pure brilliancy.
No care disturbed the calm complacency
In which his hours were passed &mdash; so cloudless shone
The present aspect of his destiny!
He was the same, companioned or alone,
For o'er his breast's repose no tempest-clouds were thrown.

The sun poured all his splendour on the day
Which brightly heralded the marriage morn:
All nature smiled beneath his orient ray;
The spreading blossom whitened on the thorn,
And waved with every breeze the mellowing corn.
Bertha went forth amid the peaceful scene,
When of his fiercer beams the sun was shorn:
'Twould have dispelled the cold ascetic's spleen,
To have beheld her form, and marked her heavenly mien.

Beauty has in it what defies the pen,
And mocks imagination's boldest flight:
It tames the savage breasts of savage men,
And melts the harsher feelings to delight:
A star amid misfortune's blackest night
Its cheering rays her sullen gloom dispel,
And make this world a heaven, in misery's spite:
Despair she snatches from his native hell,
And he revives to joy beneath her powerful spell.

There is a music in her every tone,
A silent eloquence in every tear;
In every glance a rapture ne'er unknown,
And every sigh that steals upon the ear
Sings comfort to the soul, and lulls its fear,
When 'tis the answering echo of its own.
How sweet the solace is of misery here,
When by our couch, to hush the rising groan,
Pale beauty sits to soothe where she can soothe alone!

Woman!  although it is our lot to dwell
Amidst a world of vast variety,
Where plenty pours the treasures from her shell,&mdash;
Still what were all its blessings without thee!
Man in his strength, amid the troubled sea
Of time and circumstance, had singly stood
Like some bleak solitary rock, to be
Lashed by its storms, or buried in its flood&mdash;
Didst thou not buoy him up, thou sweetest earthly good!

Along a streamlet's marge the maiden hied,
Which gently rippled through the neighbouring wood,
When she was met by haughty Akenside:
Before her unabashed the tyrant stood,
Nor by her blush, nor angry frown, subdued.
She caught the fixed expression of his eye,
Which in a moment chilled her mantling blood;
She gasped, she trembled, yet she scarce knew why,
Nor could the glance of scorn her maiden fears belie.

It was to him a stirring sight to see
How fairly heaven's own work was done in her.
As he, in all his guilt's deformity,
Stood by her, like apostate Lucifer,
She, like a lamp within the sepulchre,
Of all around her was the brightest thing:
Ne'er in her soul did one harsh passion stir;
Whilst in his bosom envy's deadly sting
Was with fresh poisons charged, her guileless heart to wring.

He shrunk not from the maiden's mute reproach,
But raised to hers his dark and flashing gaze:
She shuddered at his sudden rude approach,
And her heart throbbed 'twixt terror and amaze.
She could not meet his eye's unhallowed blaze,
And o'er her own the lids instinctive closed:
But when her drooping head she dared to raise,
Her progress he, with gentle force, opposed,
And smiled, as demons smile, while he his will disclosed.

She sickened as his most pernicious breath
Poured its pollutions on her startled ear;
His very words bore the hoarse tones of death&mdash;
His every look aroused a kindred fear.
There might be traced too well the lordly leer,
Which through the maiden's frame diffused a chill
Of cold disgust, and warned of danger near:
That eye too clearly told the heart's foul will,
And what that heart could dare its purpose to fulfil.

Ne'er had the pitying tear that orb bedewed,&mdash;
For others' woe ne'er heaved his breast the sigh;
Trained to a life of senseless hardihood,
He scorned the melting thrills of sympathy.
His tongue had often coined the ready lie
For vicious ends &mdash; as sinister as bold:
He, though a niggard, ne'er refused to buy
Where virgin innocence was to be sold&mdash;
A very wolf, he sought the loveliest of the fold.

He had advanced the timid maid to greet,
And placed her burning palm within his own,
Offered to lay his riches at her feet,
And raise her near the level of a throne:
As he avowed his love in ardent tone,
His breast with fierce desire began to heave,
While shook the maiden like a bending crone.
She heard, but was too cautious to believe,
For rich men oft will swear, and swear but to deceive.

"Accept my vows, fair maid," the monster cried,
And pressed, with painful gripe, her trembling hand;
"Give me thy charms, consent to be my bride,
And all that wealth can give, at thy command,
Shall at thy feet be scattered:  high I stand
Amid the dignities of birth and name;
Profusion casts her bounties o'er my land;
And thou shalt grace the registry of fame,
For I, through long descent, from lofty lineage came.

"Slaves on their swarthy knees before me bow,
And gems of matchless price adorn my board;
To thee shall they devote their service now,
For thou &mdash; the choice and idol of their lord&mdash;
Honoured by them, by me shalt be adored.
List to my passion's rapture, for my soul,
Fierce as a lion by the hunter gored,
Springs from the cold restrictions of controul,
And makes its eager way to pleasure's rapturous goal.

"Think not my love can any medium know,
Or chill philosophy allay its fires:
Enjoyment was designed for man below,
And love first rose to quicken our desires.
He who to Heaven's beatitude aspires,
May have its foretaste oft from beauty's lips,&mdash;
There is the heaven true wisdom most admires;
Man, like the bee that in the wild flower dips,
From woman's sweeter charms, their heavenly fragrance sips."

"Forbear," with crimsoned cheek, the maid rejoined,
"To urge a suit I never can approve:
I am another's destined, plighted bride,
Nor would I lose a portion of his love
To gain Potosi's treasures:  did the dove
E'er mate her with the taloned bird of prey?
Your language, lord, my feelings much reprove;
And, take my final answer as you may,
I must reject your suit &mdash; 'twere folly to gainsay.

"Power, titles, honours, riches, I despise,&mdash;
And glory in my humbleness of lot;
Ne'er shall I raise ambition's longing eyes
Above yon lovely, yet sequestered cot
To me the purling rill, the sylvan grot,
Than halls of state, have more transcendent charms:
I cherish the seclusion of that spot
Where oft, in infancy, a parent's arms
Have held my baby form, and hushed my vain alarms."

The brows of Akenside lowered dark and dire,
And the blood bounded from his yellow skin,
Leaving the hollow visage blanched with ire.
There was no trait, the tender heart to win;
But the fixed, glaring character of sin.
The lips began to quiver, and his heart
To heave, with gathering rage, his breast within;
He raised his angry head, and turned apart,
While from his full, quick eye, the tears began to start.

So we behold the surly mastiff turn
With half-discovered fang, when, from his jaws
Is plucked the ravished booty, and the spurn
Of angry foot, which the gaunt brute o'erawes,
Avenges well the theft.  The chieftain draws
Nigher, though baffled, for a fresh essay;
His blood &mdash; with his whole sinful soul's applause&mdash;
Boils o'er, and wakes the passions in its way,
And he can scarcely keep those fiery foes at bay.

The wild emotion in his stormy breast
He felt was every moment rising higher;
And to the maid once more himself addressed,
Curbing the eager workings of desire.
No eye could gaze on her, but must admire
Her modest dignity, her generous pride!
With wily art, he checked the kindling fire
Which angry disappointment had supplied,
And, in smooth tone, these further words replied.

"This is the idle sophistry of fools&mdash;
The heart of woman is ambition's own:
Reject the pious cant of modern schools,
For falsehood's seeds are there profusely sown,
There the thin bubble of deceit is blown.
Where lives the maid, of such unearthly mind,
Would spurn the splendid pageant of a throne?
There's no such phoenix; virtue cannot find
On earth her counterpart &mdash; then be not still unkind.

"Mine is the love which bursts from passion's spring,
Strong and impetuous, yet warm and true;
Within this heart its roots are flourishing&mdash;
Reject not then the man who doats on you,
Who can no longer now that love subdue
Which has his circling blood to fever fanned:
My wants on earth, my wishes would be few,
Could I persuade thee to accept my hand,
And reign sole mistress o'er myself, my slaves, my land.

"Who is this Edgar?  Can thy lofty soul
Exhale its essence on a thing so mean?
Come, free it from this most debased controul,
And 'twill burst forth in renovated sheen,
Spurning that contact which has lately been
A blight, a poison to its purity.
Hast thou no woman's pride? &mdash; that eye serene
Gives to thy little fluttering heart, the lie;
For who would honours scorn, that could so cheaply buy?"

"Desist, I charge thee, lord, nor press me more,"
With energy the blushing Bertha cried;
"Still must I urge what I have urged before,
That Bertha ne'er can wed with Akenside:
To-morrow's sun shall see her Edgar's bride.
Love is not mine to give; to yield my heart
Without, would be a sacrifice to pride
Which I have learned to scorn:  the transient smart
Will not afflict thee long &mdash; be generous, and depart,

"Nor further seek my worthless love to gain,
'Tis now beyond my giving; strive not then,
By means unjust, to give another pain:
Honour's the fairest guide of noble men,
And, once deserted, ne'er bestows again
Upon the renegade, her proud renown.
Nay, Lord, relax those brows, and deign to ken
That virtue scorns to tremble at a frown,
And still would spurn deceit, though blazoned in a crown."

"'Tis well, rash girl," the impatient chief rejoined,
While rage glared madly from his starting eyes,&mdash;
Since to thy interest thus thou darest be blind,
The hated minion of thy fondness dies:
O'er his expiring ashes shall arise
Revenge's song of triumph; &mdash; doting maid,
Repentance shall o'erwhelm thee:  may the skies
Shower down their deadliest curses on my head,
If on yon hated drone my vengeance be not sped!

"Thou dost not know me, girl; the fires of hell
Burn in my brain, and spread their horrors there.
My rage was never harmless where it fell:
Then mark me, senseless woman, and despair.
By all the powers of earth and heaven, I swear,
To blast his bud of promise, who has dared
To rouse the slumbering tiger from his lair!
Know, murder's sanguinary arm is bared,
And from thy placid bosom peace shall soon be scared."

He paused to breathe, and o'er his livid skin
The dark suffusion of his ire was spread;
That sanguine flush, which told of wrath within,
Deepened at length into the darkest red.
His frown grew harsh and deadly, from his head
Started the drops of anguish &mdash; fierce its throes&mdash;
The quick convulsion of his lip betrayed
A heart which rage had scared from its repose,
Whilst o'er his eye the hot lids pressed with frightful close.

That brief, but awful pause, was horror's own:
And through the maiden's panting frame there stole
A pang, which forced the involuntary groan:
It feebly burst, nor could she then controul
That struggling ebullition of the soul.
Her parting lips, and vacant smile, betrayed
Her inward terror, whilst her eyes' quick roll
Declared her woman's weakness; self-bewrayed,
Her vaunted firmness fled as she her foe surveyed.

He gazed upon her still, and when he saw
How busy terror was within her breast,
The fangs of malice then began to gnaw,
And all the living devil stood confest.
A gleam passed o'er his features, which expressed
The triumph of his mute but bitter scorn;
His victim stood before him &mdash; how unblest!
With all that loveliness, of virtue born,
Could plead to pity, &mdash; but his heart was cankerworn.

She stood in speechless agony, yet he
Who caused it, felt no ruth; his busy brain
Was labouring still with some new villany.
He had no pleasure, but in others' pain&mdash;
E'en beauty's tears to move his heart were vain.
His broad chest heaving, and his glance of fire
Forbade appeal; a hardened, fierce disdain,
Shot forth amid the flashes of his ire,&mdash;
And mercy, withering, shrunk before that aspect dire.

Bertha was dumb, scarce flowed her curdling blood,
And her chilled bosom uttered not a sigh.
Thus oft the little glory of the wood
Before the cobra stands, his small bright eye
Gleaming with horror, as, with crest raised high,
The monster glares before him: &mdash; Bertha so&mdash;
Her pallid brow turned upward to the sky&mdash;
Faces her tyrant, whilst her mild eyes flow
With the mute pleadings of unutterable woe.

Now from her presence forth the savage rushed&mdash;
His wild brain kindling with accursed intent;
The tears of frenzy from his eye-lids gushed,
And to his frame a direr aspect lent.
Straight towards his home his hurried steps he bent,
And seizing there the fell machines of death,
Retraced his eager way; and, as he went,
Anxiety and rage suppressed his breath,
Which struggled hard for vent, like his that maddeneth.

None know the tortures of a guilty soul,
But they whom guilt has branded as her own
She offers them a sweet, but poisoned bowl.
They are encompassed by a fiery zone,
Which can be quenched by penitence alone;
But where this balm of healing never steals
Into the breast, the heart congeals to stone.
Thus Akenside no bland contrition feels,
But, like a wounded pard, 'neath his own fury reels.

Gnashing his jaws, and raging with desire
To mar the prospect of a rival's bliss,
Back he pursued his way; within, the fire
Of envy blazed, nor could he now dismiss
The torturing agony:  he saw the kiss,
In fancy's mirror, play their lips around,
To whom he threatened scathe; a soul like his
Ne'er in the shackles of remorse was bound&mdash;
Revenge his hoarse trump blew, and he obeyed the sound.

Bertha was staggered, as her anxious eye
Traced his receding figure through the wood;
Her full veins throbbed, with terror's agony,
From the fierce menace of that man of blood.
In sad, but mute unconsciousness, she stood
As if the shock had paralyzed her sense,
Till thought propelling thought, the troubled flood
Dashed through her mind, with stormy turbulence,
Whilst her heart sickened at the dreaded consequence.

Could he dare play the murderer?  The thought
Flashed like the lightning through her burning brain.
Could the fulfilment of revenge be bought
With nothing less than life?  She gave the rein
To hope, and for a while it soothed her pain;
But soon on memory's re-awakened ear
The fierce infernal threatening burst again.
She breathed her Edgar's name, &mdash; he was not near
To shield the trembling maid, and soothe her anxious fear.

Dejected now, in sad and silent mood,
While drear forebodings fretted sore within,
The maid her solitary way pursued,
Wooing capricious peace, but could not win
Although her sufferings did but here begin,
The initiation chilled her very soul:
Anger had ceased to frown, if he had seen,
And vengeance dashed to earth the poisoned bowl;
But tyrant hearts are steeled 'gainst pity's bland controul.

What does this great and varied world present,
But a vast theatre of grief and crime!
Here vice is in her native element:
Throughout the peopled earth, in every clime,
Man preys on man, and, from the wings of time,
O'er the wide world flings mischief.  He is here
The minister of his own woes!  The mime
Of virtue is played off, but her pure tear
Shines, like Golconda's gem, a treasure rare and dear.

When Bertha thought upon the past, her view
Was darkened o'er with what she feared might be:
Unsought forebodings from her terrors grew,
Whilst her charged breast, from dread no longer free,
Seemed nigh to bursting with its agony.
The tear stood sparkling in its crystal cell&mdash;
It fell not o'er the fringed extremity;
Alarm had fixed it there, and, sooth to tell,
From her blanched lips no groan, no sigh, no murmur fell.

How changed in one short hour, from bright to dark,
The aspect of her mortal destiny!
When the young morn sent tip the tuneful lark
To pour his song of welcome to the sky
Her heart was blythe as his; no peril nigh
She deemed; nor could have thought, alas!  how soon
Her pleasure would be changed to agony!
A storm indeed was gathering o'er her noon,
And happiness had now withdrawn its blessed boon.

Shall her enjoyment then on earth be marred,
Her paradise be made a desert drear?
Where is the mortal yet, from woe debarred,
Who never shed affliction's blistering tear?&mdash;
When, at the great assize, there shall appear
The countless myriads of quick and dead,
'Twill be confirmed to all, how seldom here
The blessed balm of peace on man was shed&mdash;
How thickly o'er his path the thorns of woe were spread?

The bile to direful fermentation rose
Within the breast of Akenside, and gave
The final death-stroke to its stern repose.
Dark thoughts of blood, and visions of the grave
Flashed o'er his lurid fancy, while the rave
Of death, portentous smote his practised ear;
No manly visitings of nature, save
An inborn recklessness that mocked at fear,
Found to his soul their way &mdash; the worm of hell was here.

His every thought was torture, and the streams
Of agony bedewed his burning brow.
His tongue was parched and swoln, and the fierce gleams
Of his large eye glared ghastly, like the glow
Of fires which in earth's entrails feed and grow.
Such even here the dread award of crime!
No more shall peace his bosom visit now;
But darkly sailing down the stream of time,
His foul career must end in guilt's infernal clime.

How short are all its triumphs! &mdash; for awhile
It may rejoice; still must its debt be paid!
The time shall come when 'twill no longer smile,
But writhe in pangs eternal:  though delayed,
The penalty is sure; and when, arrayed
In all the gorgeous majesty of heaven,
The glories of the Judge shall be displayed,
How shall the man who ne'er with guilt hath striven,
Quail at the sight, while he despairs to be forgiven!

Bertha at length her father's cot regained,
And tremblingly her artless tale revealed;
From its spare source the scanty tear-drop drained,
And the warm currents of his blood congealed.
Long had he known the tyrant, but concealed
Such baneful knowledge from his daughter's ear;
Prudence his cautious lips had always sealed,
And he had ever shunned that man of fear
Like an infectious plague, lest peril should be near.

Here was, in sooth, a melancholy scene!
The voice of mirth was still, and all was gloom
Where her pure pastimes had so lately been.
The buds of joy, now blighted in their bloom,
Lay drooping on the stem, and in their room
Grew the rank weeds of grief.  The father here,
Whilst a forced smile his moistened eyes illume,
From his fair daughter's cheek the big round tear
Kissed, as he vainly strove her anxious mind to cheer.

To calm her, every soothing art he tried,
But his own fears were quick, his hopes were dead.
He knew the ruthless soul of Akenside,
And now this knowledge filled his mind with dread:
More than one victim had already bled
'Neath that relentless arm, which never spared
The object of its vengeance; &mdash; on his head
Ruin was sure to fall, and ill he fared
Who his ferocious might on equal chances dared.

'Tis not the worst alone who suffer here,
Since good and evil are dispensed to all;
For bad and good, throughout the varied year,
Spring's perfumes breathe &mdash; the rains of autumn fall.
This world is but a scene of general thrall;
Here must we toil for the bright liberty
Of heaven, where no more evil can befall&mdash;
Where the warm tear is wiped from every eye&mdash;
Where bliss eternal reigns &mdash; where God is ever nigh.

Mortal!  whate'er thy griefs, on Him repose
Thy trust, who can alone those griefs allay;
Who can alike augment or ease thy woes,
And strew the sweets of comfort o'er thy way.
All have been, and all must be, sorrow's prey,
Who still this earth are treading, or have trod;
But trust in heaven, its heaviest strokes will stay.
Should stern misfortune smite thee, kiss the rod&mdash;
Man is indeed the victim; but the chastener, God.

