"We meet again! &mdash; how soon!"  Thus, in the ear
Of trembling Love, Love breathes the gentle words,
Charming away the sad presaging fear
Which thrills on lone affection's bosom chords,
And on its tablet every doubt records!
"We meet again!" &mdash; Happy the wanderer's lot,
From whose lip parted Love each accent hoards,
Watching for his return in bower or cot,
Forgetting aught besides &mdash; but him forgetting not!

Happy his lot!  Where-e'er such wanderer roam,
Friendless in stranger lands &mdash; in desert wild,
Or populous garden &mdash; still his heart's at home;
In peril firm, in pleasure unbeguiled,
Absent affection's heaven-protected child!
What though the intellectual mind and eye
Brighten with charms of nature undefiled,
Or classic art?  Yet will th' unconscious sigh
Breathe thoughts that deepest still in truest bosoms lie.

But me, lone wanderer sad, no maid in bower
Awaits with pining heart, &mdash; or haply none
Who to my hearth and home may bring the dower
Of wedded joy, &mdash; though hopeless loving on,
With but the bitterer fruits of passion known,
That wring with vainest griefs th' o'erclouded mind!
Yet, though forlorn of such, not all alone
I stand &mdash; while, parting thus, I leave behind
Some other ties that still to this existence bind.

Lo!  on my country's happy shore I stand,
About to bid that shore a brief farewell;
And well I ween, whate'er more smiling land
Woos with superior softness, none the spell
Can break that knits me to th' Invincible!
Yet, Ocean!  yet, &mdash; right glad I hail thee now,
Trampling thus lightly on thy buoyant swell;
While every breeze that fans my languid brow
Freshens my heart, and adds new impulse to our prow.

Speed, speed, ye waves!  speed on &mdash; your crests uprear,
Exalt your whitening tresses to the gale;
And you, ye winds!  nor yet &mdash; nor yet forbear,
But to the ancient haven wing our sail,
Where erst the star of Bourbon did prevail.
Though yon famed cliffs, that lessen to my sight,
Gird the few hearts that would my fate bewail
Should this green surge pillow my brow ere night,
Blow, winds!  and speed my course from their imperial white.

How proudly dash the awakened billows o'er
Their weltering waste in chainless liberty!
Like freedom's waves on yonder watch-lit shore,
When Gaul had the vain glory to be free!
Now darkly swells the agitated sea
With waters that like stormiest passions heave
In human hearts untamed &mdash; but not to me
Delightless &mdash; while, by fits entranced, I weave
Wild numbers to the star that gems the brow of eve.

The star of love! &mdash; How oft to its sweet beam
Have I looked up with youth's romantic gaze,
By woodland haunt, sea-cliff; on mountain stream,
Companioned with the thoughts of early days!
Speaking in song, or with the 'witching lays
Of high magician fired &mdash; or, it may be,
Pondering unskilful measures to the praise
Of favourite maiden dear: &mdash; Still, still to me
Love's star it seems, e'en from this wild tumultuous sea.

Since last I trod thy lilied fields, oh FRANCE!
Seven springs the wintry ruin have repaired.
Alas, how joys recede as years advance!
Yet something of youth's freshness time hath spared;
And I recall the perils that I dared,
The joys I prized, as things which I can still
Dare and enjoy; nor is Love's spirit scared
Yet from the inherent and omnipotent ill,&mdash;
The passion which at times subdues the loftiest will.

Welcome, Versailles!  to thy proud terraces,
Which to my soul the bloom of early days
Recall, &mdash; when every sight had power to please,
And ardent fancy coloured the sun's rays,
And my heart blossomed to the breath of praise,
Dreaming of fame!  Thy desolate halls I tread,
On thy fair fonts and breathing sculptures gaze;
Yet, though youth's wondering ecstasy is fled,
Bleeds memory where a Queen's insulted bosom bled.

And in thy sweet recess, oh Trianon!
And, with a deeper feeling, in the cell
Where royal beauty pined, I muse alone;
Nor, while 'gainst fiends my stifling pulses swell,
'Gainst freedom's cause doth one weak thought rebel.
No! &mdash; yet thrice cursed be the assassin brood
Who her bright progress marred with deeds of hell!
Till anarchy and murder, like a flood,
Ravaged her bloom, and bade her glory set in blood.

Heavens what a dawn was hers!  All nations gazed
On the transcendent rising of that star.
In climes remote, dejected Slavery raised
Her brow, and hailed that promise from afar.
'Twas not the common cry of vulgar war&mdash;
Hark!  myriad voices speak aloud as one;
Hands, numberless wreathe Freedom's peaceful car;
Freedom's exalted voice strikes to the throne,
And stamps a people's rights its just support alone.

Enough! &mdash; Hope doubly failed:  a brood accurst
Struck Freedom down, as from Gaul's fiery womb
She rose; &mdash; and what the ray that o'er her burst,
When 'mid her civil throes France sank o'ercome?
What but a baleful meteor through the gloom?
Ah!  could she &mdash; could astounded Europe &mdash; deem
That military victor-god (to whom
She yielded all) aught but a snare, whose beam
Misled to Slavery's depths, and foiled her liberal dream?

Away the thought!  withering the heart that dares
The laurel of a conqueror to adore!
Ill 'mid the strife of glory freedom fares.
Doubt ye? &mdash; Search history's blood-soiled records o'er;
Mark still your Caesars rotten at the core!
Great, but not great as the free mind could frame
Those hearts that mould mankind, &mdash; achieving more
Ever for their own base ambition's shame
Than for the weal of Man &mdash; in freedom's holiest name!

Away the thought!  withering the heart: &mdash; Still, still,
We look with hope on such, and, sickening, turn
In quick disgust.  Oh!  when will Hope fulfil
Her promise in the mightiest, and the urn
Of glory with no poisonous ashes burn,
But a sweet incense to the heavens?  Away!&mdash;
While here young joy surrounds me, shall I spurn
Her offerings?  or with faction blot a lay
Whose echoes soon may thrill o'er the Alps' sky-ward way?

Yet in thy sphere, O proud metropolis!
Still could I linger with no joyless heart;
For in thy circuit springs the fount of bliss,
And all that youthful beauty can impart
Of sweet delight-tricked, yet not stained, with art&mdash;
Is in thy circling charm; and no where flies
With surer aim young Cupid's welcomed dart;
While in each cool arcade the brightest eyes,
And in each bowery walk, the unwary heart surprise.

Whether in thy fair garden, meek La Chaise!
O'er dust belov'd some living statue bends,
Pining in youthful bloom; or where the ray
Of Beauty intertwine, while Fashion lends
Her courtly aid, and forth her minions sends
On terraced walk; or where the lightsome dance
Speeds happiest; or where mimic Art commends
Her genius in proud galleries; &mdash; still, oh France!
Thy queenly capital teems with beauty's bright romance.

But, fare thee well!  Where the blue waters sleep
In their immortal beauty, and uprears
Mont Blanc his arduous heights, embosom'd deep
In clouds that gird his form with shadowy fears,
(Save where aloft his dazzling crown appears,
Winning Heaven's smile to that unearthly height,)
I go.  Then, farewell, France!  where blood and tears
Have left few traces, but Love beams as light
In happy eyes as though thy fields had known no blight.

Long may love be their light!  nor fiercer fire
Flash from their starry orbs! &mdash; for lovelier eyes
Love never lit nor Passion did inspire,
Than those your own Parisian paradise
Profusely boasts; where all the heart can prize
Of soft or gay is lavished with a bland
Luxuriance, that beguiles alike the wise
And fool, and gives her boulevards' magic band
A charm few cities match &mdash; few cynics can withstand.

Yet, France!  in thy rich galleries and proud halls
One haughtiest name is left a blank alone&mdash;
Already vanished from the faithless walls
As though they ne'er his eagle's plume had known.
Go, search Versailles, Elysee, Trianon,
St. Cloud, or statelier Fontainebleau &mdash; in vain!
No breathing canvass, tapestry, porcelain, stone,
Images that stem visage, or the train
Of victories that blazed forth in one transcendent reign.

No!  to the Eighteenth Louis and Tenth Charles,
Bourbon on Bourbon crowd their galleries;
While of the glistering string some goodlier pearls,
Set and re-set, for ever cloy the eyes&mdash;
Warrior'd or sainted &mdash; in each quaint disguise;
But of the Chief who his proud throne, upreared
Upon the wreck of theirs, and dimmed the skies
With his o'ershadowing fame &mdash; loved, hated, feared&mdash;
From the be-lilied walls all trace hath disappeared!

All &mdash; save one relic of his vanished sway,
One humblest relic &mdash; as to shame the pride
Of his great memory!  when he signed away
(Pushed from his height by Fortune's adverse tide)
The realms which were his glory, and supplied
His foes with a brief triumph.  Mark the room
Wherein he doffed the crown that had defied
Legitimacy's scoff, and, charmed the gloom
From a vain nation's heart with victory's Gallic plume.

On through the land of vineyards!  where the vine
Clusters around each cottage, clothes each hill,
Fringes the road's interminable line,
And with its generous produce greets you still
At each auberge, &mdash; produced with right good will.
But Dijon pass not all unhonoured here,
Where Gothic towers and classic memories fill
The soul, to whose enlightened ken appear
Relics of other days and minds to genius dear.

Here, where the Ouche and Suzon cut the plain,
Arose three chiefs of diverse eloquence
Bossuet, who leavened the imperial strain
With truth, and mercy preached to penitence;
Buffon, who with keen eye and zeal intense
Walked in the light of the Linnaean star;
And rude Crebillon, who with fierier sense
Yoked the stern passions to his tragic car,
And followed Corneille's steps, nor meanly, nor afar.

Lo, as up Jura's mountain land we pass,
'Mid hanging cliffs shagged with the glorious pine,
'Mid deepening glens where foams the liquid glass,
'Mid rock-strewn wilds that shame, proud Scotia!  thine;
Where light and shadow, depth and height, combine,
Wood, rock, and wave, and steepy arduous road,
And cliffs abrupt, that wake the enthusiast Nine,
And fling wild nature's magic spells abroad;&mdash;
Oh!  shall my spirit in vain strive to spurn off her load?

Here, too, the works of man intrude, nor mar
E'en the great Architect's stupendous scene.
Look where the sinuous causeway winds afar,
Marking where human hands have busy been;
Lo, where the gleamy windings intervene!
Here &mdash; there &mdash; the Gallic demi-god hath left
His steps; and, through blue cliff and piny green
As your wheels move, turn to his fame who cleft
The rocks, and smoothed his path through the crag's fearful rift.

Downward, where Morez, 'twixt her mountain walls,
Gleams in the evening sun, we slowly move;
While deep beneath the slippery slope appals,
And high the o'er-jutting crags impend above,
Crowned with their Alpine pine's eternal grove.
How gloriously the circling hills embrace
The undulating dell!  where happy Love
Might fix his bower, or pen or pencil trace
The wildly-featured charms deep-varying Nature's face.

Now, Morez, from thine azure torrent stream
Delicious trout our evening board supply;
With honey that might wake a classic dream
Of Hybla or Hymettus ('neath a sky
As pure as theirs), and, effervescing nigh,
Wine from the vivid grape of Cuisance pressed
At Arbois, &mdash; long in reputation high
For the pale nectar that still sparkles best,
And in these mountain vales cheers the inn's pilgrim guest.

Hail to the silver light on tree and stream!
Now let me to my brow the freshness woo.
In such an hour the vacant mind will dream
Of other lights, as soft, as transient too!
The light of youth &mdash; to youth itself untrue;
The light of love &mdash; extinguished or o'ercast;
The light of fame &mdash; untreacherous to how few!
Yet luring and misleading to the last;&mdash;
While friendship's light goes out at the first wintry blast:

Morn on the hills! &mdash; How lovely smiles the day
To happy eyes that never knew a tear!
Hailing alike the renovating ray
In close-pent cities and in deserts drear;
But Sorrow's self might bless its influence here,
And dead hopes in chilled bosoms seem to live;
While soaring cliffs and sweeping valleys cheer
The fancy, and the struggling spirits strive
To glow &mdash; as though youth, love, fame, friendship, could revive.

Alas for the light hopes of credulous youth!
When Fancy's rainbow pencil paints sublime
All-radiant forms beyond the touch of Truth,
How the mind lends its colour to each clime,
Imaging things beyond the birth of time!
Then dawns the dream of immortality&mdash;
Laurels &mdash; but guiltless of blood's stain and crime;
And goals ne'er won, visions of things to be,
Amuse the unbroken heart: &mdash; thus it was once with me.

But Pleasure brings her pall, &mdash; and brighter things,
Tinged with the hues of mind and fancy strong,
Mock the pursuer's hope, or, caught, have wings
That baffle and escape the grasp ere long,&mdash;
Leaving th' excited heart to its own wrong,
And sufferance doubly keen; &mdash; while the bowed soul
Droops o'er the wreck of high resolves, &mdash; among
Her slaves a slave, &mdash; without that self-control,
Which, binding shattered powers, refits the moral whole.

Slowly as up the mountain pass we wind,
To Gaul's rich forestry we bid adieu,
And bless the mighty scenes we leave behind.
But, ha!  what mightier flash upon the view?
As through the severing cliffs (Gaul's mountain clew)
Mont Blanc, with all his Alps, in shivered line
Of snow, peers forth, &mdash; and Leman sleeps in blue,
Sashing Helvetia's plain, whose heights divine,
Savoy or Swiss, in heaven's unbounded azure shine!

Leman!  on thy blue bosom droops my strain;&mdash;
Here, where lake, mountains, glowing skies, inspire,
Lake, mountains, glowing skies, inspire in vain,
While the heart vibrates to a loftier lyre!
Boy, ply thine oar where the blue waves retire
In yon small bay.  Swift up the vine-clothed hill
I climb, and view the dome wherein the fire
Of a bright spirit burned brightest, and at will
Roam through the laurell'd scene &mdash; respiring genius still.

And here I tread where trod the lord of song,
'Mid the dwarf orchard where his towering mind
Reposed awhile from the world's fame and wrong,
Yet with its sumless wealth enriched mankind.
Dark in their shrouds the wondrous Alps behind
Sleep, as they slept when from their heights he drew
Meet inspiration; and before me wind
Thy mazes, Leman, in celestial blue&mdash;
And Jura's cloudy ridge &mdash; touched by his genius too!

Yes Jura speaks of him &mdash; and the blue wave
Whispers of him; and the green chestnut grove
That shades his bower recalls him from the grave,
And gives his noble image to our love,
As when 'mid this lone garden he did rove!
His shadow fills the scene; and as I gaze
On the blest mansion (that henceforth shall move
Love, awe, and deepest reverence), sad I raise
My spirit to his great name, bright with immortal praise.

But the Alps haunt me, &mdash; and I leave awhile,
Leman, thy wave for their ethereal snows;
Again, ere long, to greet thine azure smile,
Where Meillerie breathes a passionate repose.
Then shall I view the evening tints of rose,
On peaks whose sky-blush fired the enthusiast's page.
Meanwhile, where round Mont Blanc the shadows close,
I go &mdash; to view those heights through many an age
Renown'd, and my deep thirst of nature's charm assuage.

Where the Arve winds through Maglan's sweeping vale,
Fenced with steep cliffs and cloud-laced hills, I wend;
Yet pause, great Nature's magic skill to hail
In Balme's deep grot, through whose long caves I bend,
Where stalactitic walls stretch without end,
Discovering to the flambeau's lurid glare
Strange shapes (bird, beast, man, reptile) while impend
Nature's arched roofs, with quaint devices rare,
And to unfathomed gulfs their jaws the abysses bare.

On through the chasm of Alps!  o'er craggy steeps,
Through jagg'd, precipitous rifts!  Around you see
The pine upspring; while down the ruinous deeps
The mountain-torrent foams distractedly!
By our rough ear Savoyard imps with glee
Speed up each stony crag, and proffer fruit,
Spars, flowers, &mdash; or beg a sou for charity,&mdash;
From pretty faces a ne'er-slighted suit; &mdash;
And such there bloom e'en where the Alpine forests shoot.

Oh beauty!  female beauty! &mdash; if amid
These savage scenes I may apostrophise
Thy softness &mdash; whether in wild valleys hid,
Or blooming peerless in life's opener skies,
What charm can match the love that fills thine eyes?
Tedious without thee, joy hath slight regard;
From thy sweet presence low distraction flies;
In Alpine dell, Parisian boulevard,
But chief in home retired, &mdash; thy sphere and thy reward!

Thou mak'st the world a garden:  in thy light
All things a deeper loveliness assume;
Nor wholly dark is e'en affliction's night,
If thy dear eyes the dreary depth illume,
Cheer the sad heart, and mitigate the gloom.
Yon low-roofed cot, with Beauty for its queen,
Outshines Versailles &mdash; since Marie's ruthless doom:
What are the pillared dome, the terraced green,
If Beauty deign not add her sweetness to the scene?

What resting-place like her dear bosom sweet,
For man's o'erwearied heart?  and whither, say,
Since Adam found his Eden incomplete
Without her, flies he in affliction's day,
Save to that home of love?  Her heart for aye
Is home, &mdash; and home without her heart is none:
In sickness and in sorrow she her ray
Of love withdraws not, &mdash; life's benigner sun&mdash;
Our all in all on earth &mdash; our heaven on earth begun!

Away! &mdash; o'er yon dim cloud what spangling speck
Shines in mid heaven?  Upon that matchless brow,
Lo!  the light silver draperies gradual break,
Revealing, as they ope propitious now,
The firm-set and more dazzling mass below!
Come, let me near this wondrous Alpine king,
And at his misty throne transported bow,&mdash;
Mighty beyond the mind's imagining,
Lofty beyond the pitch of each adventurous wing!

Ay, let me near his glaciers! &mdash; How they gleam
In broadening masses down his glorious sides!
While cold aloft their icy sources seem
Like oceans frozen with their surging tides,
All mute &mdash; whereon no whispering ripple chides
Fixed with their billows in their depths of blue
Perpetual &mdash; where no more insulting rides
Bark of vain structure, but &mdash; as feeble too!&mdash;
Man stays his slippery steps with pole of Alpine yew.

Amid these mightiest scenes, where all is great,
From the piled mountain to the torrent's roar,
How small alone appears man's outward state!
Whether he strews his hamlets by the shore
Of the loud river, or, adventurous more,
Builds his pine cabin on the mountain's breast,
Perched like an eagle's nest where few wings soar;
Yet toil-strung nerves and virtuous hearts attest
His care who doth dispose where seeth his wisdom best.

Lo, where yon hospice, 'mid snow-bosomed hills,
Standeth in simple sacredness alone&mdash;
(Where first your eye the Piedmont prospect fills)
Emerging from that wilderness of stone)
There, where the Fathers ope to guests unknown
Their doors, and spread the hospitable board,
I rest, &mdash; nor fail to mark, at vesper tone,
Thy tomb, Dessaix!  by France not undeplored,
When o'er Marengo's plain Gaul's victor eagle soared.

Around, what savage loneliness! &mdash; and mark,
Deep in the hollow, 'neath the winding path
That guides you to this height &mdash; no coppice dark&mdash;
The relics of the avalanche's wrath!
The unmelting snow, on whom the sunbeam hath
No power!  Oh God!  to hear the thunder-burst
Of the fierce lauwine, as he speeds to swathe
The vale with his chill whiteness!  Trebly curst
He whose loved infants smile, within such valley nurst.

Yet, stranger!  at yon hospitable seat
The terrors of the wilderness forget;
Nor their canine Goliaths from your feet
Chide hasty; &mdash; deep to them the wanderer's debt,
Amid these wilds:  mark the clench'd jaw firm-set,
The lion-featured majesty, &mdash; and think
How oft have these, when every horror met
Round the poor pilgrim wretch, about to sink
In depths unknown, preserved from pale destruction's brink!

Yes, cheer thee at yon sanctuary!  Yet, ere
With right good zest you to the banquet close
At eve, survey the Italian mountains fair,
In tempting prospect; nor the occasion lose
Through feebler love of indolent repose&mdash;
But, spite of keenest air, thy steps incline
Where erst the Roman Jove's bleak temple rose,
Within wild Piedmont's boundary stone and line;&mdash;
Then welcome to the board, and hail the ruby wine!

Nor here unheard is Woman's gentler tone,
Nor, in this sternly wild monastic scene,
Are Beauty's sidelong glances all unknown
Her fair bright lock and ever-graceful mien:
Ah!  not unprized by monkish hearts, I ween,
What time she deigns, with soul-subduing smile,
At convent-board to reign a passing queen&mdash;
A stranger guest, &mdash; on pilgrimage the while,&mdash;
Intent to prove how weak monk's vow 'gainst woman's wile.

And &mdash; save thee, heart! &mdash; lo, blooming by my side,
A mountain maid, a daughter of the clime!
Lisping its marvels with a simple pride,
Storying each lonely lake and peak sublime
With legend old or snatch of Gallic rhyme,
Cherished by patriarchal mountaineers,
Traditionary 'mid the wrecks of time;
Such lay, perchance, as distant home endears,
Breathing to exiled heart the voice of other years.

"Quand reverrai-je en un jour
Tous les objets de mon amour!
Nos clairs ruisseaux.
Nos hameaux,
Nos coteaux,
Nos montagnes,
Et l'ornement des nos montagnes
La si gentille Isabean?
Dans l'ombre d'un ormeau,
Quand danserai-je an son du chalumeau?"

On! &mdash; where Helvetic liberty arose
Haste we, o'er lake and mount of skyey grain;
But where the Jungfrau lifts his taintless snows
Pale Fancy re-assumes her wild domain,
Nor tasks the homage of a laggard strain&mdash;
For Genius there a lasting spell hath poured;
While loved Astarte's phantom cheek again
Blooms in death's mockery, and her Magian lord
Evokes the spirits that must obey whom they abhorred!

Such is the force of mind! &mdash; and henceforth who
Shall "crush St. Gothard's snows," or scent the air
Of "dairy farms," nor feel an impulse new
From the new witcheries waked by Campbell there?
How the heart bleeds o'er Udolph's sister fair,
Dying of hopeless love!  the cureless ill,
Baffling the leech's art with its despair,&mdash;
Which, like a canker in the bud, doth kill
Youth's rose, and direst lurks in gentlest bosoms still.

Woe's such!  the tender heart and sensitive,
In world so rude, is but a piteous thing,&mdash;
Like skiff that in wild ocean may not live,
O'erset with the first wave though life may cling
Yet a brief while, when every hope takes wing,
To the frail hull.  There needs no second wave,&mdash;
 Or o'er the wreck its waters it may fling;
No earthly hand the shattered bark can save,
None heal the wounded heart &mdash; whose rest is in the grave.

Peace be to such!  But not the Helvetian maid
Alone, with winning breath, claims homage here,&mdash;
Here, where each Alp that lifts his icy head
Stands sentinel to an heroic bier,
And points the immortal spot, to Freedom dear,
Where the stern Archer made his name a spell
To every distant age.  Yon fane draw near,
Reverent, &mdash; nor quench thy bosom's fiery swell
Where 'gainst the Austrian's scoff burnt the high heart of TELL.

A name like this shines out upon the roll
Of mightiest names &mdash; pre-eminent and pure&mdash;
Hailed still and hallowed by the great in soul,
When stars and crowns have nothing to allure.
Yea, these may fail, &mdash; but in free hearts, secure,
The saviour of his country, happier, finds
A monument of love, that shall endure
The wrongs of time, &mdash; pillared in patriot minds,&mdash;
Unshaken 'mid the strife of faction's warring winds!

Ay!  as of old the Teian vainly strove
The Atreidae in their princely height to sing,
While his lyre murmured love &mdash; and only love&mdash;
So!  in the bias of each heart and string,
The harp, cold in the service of a king,
Kindles to rapture in the heroic cause
Of freedom and her champions, &mdash; proud to fling&mdash;
A glory o'er the all-glorious, who o'erawes
The tyranny of power, and cheeks with guardian laws.

Thus, on the bosom of the gentle lake,
Whose waves the circling sister Cantons kiss,
My thoughts the colour of their action take,
Or glow enraptured to no name but this.
But, musing rapt where the heroic Swiss
Spurned off his bleeding country's robe of shame,
And bade the keen avenging arrow hiss
In Gesler's heart, &mdash; I feel his loftier name
A charm that makes yon proud sky-piercing mountains tame.

Yet to his name, and to the topmost snows
Of those dim heights, farewell!  The exulting sea,
As 'twere, of mountain breakers, lo!  I lose
Amid the fleecy heavens, &mdash; which still to me
Seem chequered with their hoar sublimity;
While fancy shapes each cloud of texture light
Into wild peak (as Finsteraarhorn may be)
 Of fear, &mdash; and the horizon cheats the sight
With a long line of Alps, heaved in less glistering white.

Hark!  on mine ear, as through night's thickening shade
Our wheels monotonous roll, what thunder-roar
Peals awful?  From the depth of yon dim glade
It bursts!  'Tis the Rhine's wave, shaking the shore
With its astounding leap; &mdash; where, as of yore,
By Laufen's deafened height it wrestles aye
With rocks of giant mould. &mdash; On, on!  and o'er
The stream twice crossed, its windings I obey,
Till Strasbourg's matchless spire beacon my westering way.

Now for thy heart, Germania!  o'er the bridge
Floating athwart thy limitary Rhine:
So, where yon mountains rear their piny ridge,
I'll muse, &mdash; where Superstition grows divine
In magic hands of Genius, that refine
Not gold from dross, but dross itself to gold.
There shall the poet's or romancer's line
Wake fancy, and those thrilling springs unfold
Of joy, which o'er the heart mysterious influence hold.

Yet, where the ashes of De Saxe repose,
(Leaving thy marvels to a Goethe's lyre)
I mark the glorious sculptures that disclose
The dust-of mould Herclulean and of fire
Caesarean; &mdash; while the lion's fangs in ire
Gnash, and the prostrate bear howls overthrown,
And the bruised eagle's wings cease to aspire,
And grief-struck France kneels suppliant for her own,
And Death the tomb unfolds; &mdash; imaged in ghastly stone!

There breathes the chief, heroic to the last,
With dauntless step descending to the tomb,
Unshaken, while his country faints aghast,
Unclouded 'mid death's swift o'ershadowing gloom,
Piercing with eagle eye the depth of doom!
Lo!  at a grateful monarch's high command,
The all-humbling grave a glory doth assume;
While Pigalle's re-creative mind and hand
Bid the lost hero there in deathless beauty stand!

Onward!  where princely Baden's widowed fair
Holds her sweet court, due homage let me pay.
What though Napoleon's awful name she bear?
That name shall be her brightest spell for aye!
But wit and beauty claim a softer lay,
While in her kindred lineaments we trace
The charms that could an empire's toils repay,
When Josephine, in pride of form and face,
Seemed to her mighty lord a throne's endearing Grace.

No royal name wins mean devotion here,&mdash;
Say, without fame or beauty what is power?
But Stephanie claims all to Beauty dear,
With fame's reflected halo for her dower,
And wit &mdash; that dignifies the social hour,
Or in the festal sparkles; while she reigns
Amid the lovely still the loveliest flower,
In whose applause no hireling poet feigns,
Thrilling beneath the smile that royal beauty deigns.

But if, in fair Napoleon's happier sphere,
Each humbler poet, like Torquato moved,
Feels how a princess may become too dear,
And a new Leonora too beloved,&mdash;
Say, what of bolder rapture hath he proved,
Pygmalion-like, who (as on the free shore
Of Maine with careless step and eye he roved)
Hath hailed young Ariadne, as of yore
Matchless, &mdash; nor deemed it sin that marble to adore!

Lo, how that light and graceful arm, reclined
On the pard's couching brow, a robe sustains
Which hides no beauty, &mdash; while the ethereal mind
Speaks from a face where more than beauty reigns
In an immortal lustre, and constrains
The heart to love; &mdash; and oh!  that faultless form,
Those limbs enwreathed in facile curve (sweet chains
Of ravishment for young hearts ta'en by storm),
What joy, that these at least shall 'scape the gourmand worm!

Here gaze thy fill, &mdash; or, if the sister Muse,
Robed in her rainbow vest, delight thee more,
Go where the soul of Raphael did transfuse
Its essence on the canvass, &mdash; and adore,
At Darmstadt, what breathes inspiration o'er
That gallery!  Mark the ecstatic genius high
Kindling in him, &mdash; the Voice that went before
Immanuel, &mdash; and, if Immortality
Hath form, say &mdash; speak &mdash; if there it glows not to thine eye!

'Tis not a relic of a brilliant school,
Priceless to connoisseurs, &mdash; but 'tis a ray
Flashed from a soul outshining technic rule,
And thirsting to pour forth its inward day!
The parted lips, the absorbed eyes, portray
All that imagination can conceive
Of mind, &mdash; too beauteous for a shrine of clay,
Yet lightening through it, till you half believe
Those hues a glorious flesh, o'er which no friends shall grieve.

Hail, Art divine!  no faint creator thou!
Empowered, as by a godlike energy,
The nothingness of canvass to endow
With a transcendent life to mind and eye!
Whether in humour or sublimity
Thou bid'st at will the expressive colours speak,&mdash;
Magical mimic!  whose creations high
Glow round me while I muse; &mdash; e'en Death can wreak
No curses here, &mdash; 'gainst these his withering arm is weak.

But who is she, lapped in a dream of love?
Goddess of smiles and passionate pleasures!  say,
Dwells yet thy spirit in the Idaean grove?
Or breathes it here in glowing life to-day,
Spell-drawn by Titian's mastery?
Far away From thy terrestrial temples, &mdash; from the sea
Whence thou wast born, amid the sparkling spray,&mdash;
Thus in Art's fane I seem to gaze on thee,
The ocean-born &mdash; the queen &mdash; young Love's divinity!

Methinks I see thee rising from the wave,
Sweet Aphrodite!  whiter than the foam;
While thy pure glossy limbs the billows lave,
And o'er thy breasts thy humid tresses roam:
Born for the skies!  which were thy proper home,
Yet destined o'er all human hearts to reign,
Still to be worshipped through all years to come,
While the celestial stars their light retain,
E'en while rolls dashing on thine own blue nursing main.

Methinks again, bright goddess!  I behold
Thy wonderfully loveliest form revealed,
Superior to the Jealous and the Cold,
Though each with not a glowing charm concealed,
When to the Dardan's judgment each appealed!
Oh Phrygian boy!  a fire was in thy blood,&mdash;
Two of the fairest of the fair must yield;
And there before thy dazzled eyes they stood!
But Venus &mdash; Venus most thy mortal sense subdued.

Now, ye who feel for MAN!  to him who gave
Art's VEHICLE OF KNOWLEDGE to mankind,
And, far as Ocean rolls his utmost wave,
Bade light and letters recreate the mind,
Pay we renown, &mdash; where the Rhine's waters wind
By Mayence, fertilising, as they flow,
Their shores of beauty, but less bloom behind
Leaving than the triumphant PRESS can shew,
Where-ever breathing minds its mightier influence know.

Borne on thy sea-like wave, wide-rolling Rhine!
What thoughts unuttered in the bosom spring,
While scenes, aye shifting on these banks of thine,
To the soul's eye romantic visions bring,
Prompting alike the pencil or the string!
Towers, bold in ruin, o'er the Gothic lyre
Tempt the romancer his wild hand to fling;
While undulating hills, &mdash; that never tire
The glance &mdash; towns, vineyards, isles &mdash; a varying joy inspire.

Yet, gazing on these monuments of yore,
These Gothic towers (how lovely in decay!)
That deck, fair Rhine!  thy many-winding shore,&mdash;
Mould'ring memorials of an earlier day!
When war and revel, slavery and sway,
Made up man's history; &mdash; Oh, turn to him
Once more, whose useful Art diffused the ray
Of knowledge, that made Power's blood-beacon dim,
And scattered slavish fears with Mind's superior beam!

Tracing thy downward course, immortal Rhine!
(Trebly immortal, &mdash; in thy fame of old,&mdash;
In thy perennial beauty, &mdash; in the line
Of genius, glowing aye, but ne'er less cold
Than in thy varied praise), though much untold
Springs of enchantment thy green banks along,
Where the wide stream winds glorious, calm or bold;
Yet to thy beauty will I do no wrong,
Nor shame thee with my lay, graced as thou art with song.

But what of glory?  Shall I smile or weep
Where, Mont St. Jean!  thy Belgic Lion's mound
Commands yon fields of fame, with easy sweep
O'er the bright undulating plains around,
Where last Gaul's worshipped Eagle beat the ground
With baffled wing?  Were all who perished here
Glorious, and with unquestioned laurels crowned?
What!  they who struck for Kings with heart sincere,
Alike, and they who fought to vanquish kingly fear?

Peace to the dead! &mdash; or shall we rather cry
Glory?  and wreathe each monument with bays?
But monumentless, lo, the thousand lie,
Save in cleft hearts; and where the sod displays
A fresher verdure, there the breath of praise
Lavish unblamed!  Sleeps the poor soldier there,
Who sought alone for his loved leader's praise,
And struck with simplest loyalty, nor e'er
Doubted his country's cause, &mdash; but scattered doubt to air.

Such were the hearts that poured their dearest blood
For the dread CHIEF who his last station took
On yon low ridge that flanks the winding road,
Ere yet the field and fortune he forsook.
Ah!  when their failing bands more feebly struck,
Desperate, what thoughts weighed on the mighty lord
Who in that loss the loss of all must brook?
His own fell fate, keener than Wellesley's sword,
Entered his soul, and spread a canker self-abhorred!

Mark where he flies!  Woe and alas for him!
Woe to the vanquished hand, the unvanquished mind
In whose proud shade waxed impotent and dim
All else &mdash; till Glory struck her minion blind,
And he became the symbol to mankind
Of an o'erweening Tyranny, and grew,
E'en as some span-long cloud that, in the wind
Veering, anon dark rushes o'er the blue,
Portent of storm &mdash; swift risen &mdash; so wildly scattered too!

O!  when the Sun of Victory arose
O'er Austerlitz, with its unrivalled ray,
Who could foresee the shamed and darkening close
Of him who shattered kingdoms on that day,
With eagles, &mdash; matchless where he led the way!
Whether, deep verging to Marengo's plain,
O'er Alps opposed his wondrous pathway lay,
Or Wagram's reddening heights saw Austria rain
Her blood, or Jena reeked with Prussia's life &mdash; in vain!

Who could foresee? &mdash; Woe, woe for him, and shame,
E'er since his eagles of the sun defied
Iberia's vengeful wrath, &mdash; e'er since the flame
Of Moscow scorched and scathed their wings of pride,
E'en on the Kremlin's dome!  while, streaming wide,
Fierce flashed the maddening element below!
Thenceforth in vain Gaul's warrior offspring died;
Tottered the fabric to its overthrow,&mdash;
Leipsig's blood-wave presaged, St. Jean!  thy mightier woe.

Perhaps his fate is just, &mdash; and it may teach
Inordinate Ambition (when no sense
Of human feeling can the oppressor reach
With its benign heart-quickening influence)&mdash;
Teach that power's curbless rage is impotence
'Gainst the strong ire and the roused spirits combined
Of nations, whom Peace leagues in her defence,
When dazzling actions can no longer blind
Fortune, who spurns at last these spurners of mankind.

But thou, my Country!  to whose fetterless shore
Cuts my swift prow athwart thy subject sea,&mdash;
Parted awhile, I seem to love thee more,
And with a child's devotion cling to thee.
Oh!  still, as first &mdash; as mightiest of the free&mdash;
Watch, guard those rights, bought with no slavish blood
Transmitted to the last posterity,
Springs of all-inappreciable good,
Pure-welling and sublime 'gainst Power's encroaching flood.

Yea!  guard thy rights, &mdash; since, falling from this height
Of liberty, whereat the nations gaze
With envy ill-dissembled (while the light
Of moral Power pours its unwithering blaze
Around thy tower of greatness), who shall raise
Anew the eclipsing Star that so outshone
Theirs?  who the darkness and the cloud shall chase?
But guard those rights &mdash; sooner impaired than won&mdash;
Cherish thy Popular Powers, and nought can shake thy Throne.

Foremost in arts, in arms, in wealth, in power,&mdash;
Say, what can dash thee from thy glorious sphere,
Save treason to the cause which bids thee tower
Loftiest, and hold the world in awe &mdash; not fear&mdash;
While to this trust thy children are sincere?
My Country!  still, where-e'er thine ensign streams,
Be it of RIGHT the welcomed harbinger!
Then to the smiling South leave fruits, flowers, beams,&mdash;
Thine be the MORAL GRACE that Glory best beseems!
