LAUSANNE.
A mountain worshipper behold, nor blame
To other I this title all prefer;
Say, is there aught unhallowed in the name?
Let not the sound alarm; deem not I err;
Disperse your fears; let not the word deter
The ear, the eye; &mdash; not mountains but the hand
That made them, placed them himself ever near
I bow to; &mdash; to the palm the wind, the land,
The yeasty sea that makes to sink, to rise at his command.

Let loose the shackles of the mind, and fly
With me to range, to soar make thou essay:
Seek ROSA'S unexplored summit high,
When the Earth's wheel brings back the Sabbath day,
Seek yonder spireless, humble roof and pray;
Each bickering fatal to the Christian creed,
Taught by the scene sublime around, allay,
Think of the Cross, and with the Saviour bleed,
And far as Nature's frailty wills it, imitate his deed.

ADDRESS TO THE LITTLE CHURCH AT ST. MARTIN, NEAR SALLENCHE, AT THE FOOT OF MONT BLANC.
WRITTEN ON THE SPOT.
How humble dost thou raise thy modest head,
As if unconscious of thy envied site,
Where all her beauties Nature proud hath shed
To gratify the never-sated sight.
Dark woods-wild rocks &mdash; crowned steeps &mdash; and there in night&mdash;
The sacred mount, where seldom heard the tread,
The foot of busy man &mdash; stoled in white
He kindred keeps with other worlds that sweep
Their mighty shadows o'er him, hold communion deep.

But yet though humble thou, silent and meek,
Thy form is not o'erlooked &mdash; the altar thou
Where offered are our orisons, &mdash; we seek
Him, the Almighty, who on yonder brow
Has ta'en his cloudy seat, &mdash; to whom all bow,
From whence he seems to look while now I speak,
As now I bending offer up my vow,
An awful shadow, passing though it be,
But for a few short moments o'er yon icy sea!

To reach that brow that consort holds on high,
We must thy aid seek, fail without thy prayer,
That which alone conducts us to the sky
Where sits the mountain god in his own chair;
His home a cloud, his royal robe as fair,
As pure as is the star which sparkles nigh
His head, its diadem, as if to scare
Man from the mystic ground where angels wing,
More sweet where they to Heaven their Hallelujah's sing!

The night is passed &mdash; the morn is come, &mdash; and sung
Hath been by thee thy matin song; thy chime
Heard in the vale, the nearer hills among,
Not so by him who scorns the voice of time,
Old as the world and still not past his prime.
Nor vain thy bell its warning note has flung,
That voice heard not unheeded, save when crime
Can look on yonder Alp God's work, and cry,
"Behold!  see here the work of Chance &mdash; Chance is the Deity!"

MONT BLANC. &mdash; MONTANVERT.
MERS DE GLACE.
Oh!  what a sea of silent waves is here!
'Tis hard to know which is or snow or cloud,
Whether the feeling they inspire is fear
Or joy, as now each mountain, in its shroud.
Lifts high its head, as of its stature proud,
As if contemning those who creep below
The little great &mdash; that vain, that empty crowd,
Who, knowing nothing, think they all things know;
Tossed vainly through life's fitful fever to and fro.

Though from the noisy vale is heard no prayer,
Still orisons from hence to Heaven ascend,
And praise and gladness too, and joy &mdash; for there
Their many voices many waters blend,
While now the valleys their sweet echos lend,
Heard far and wide and loud from every fall.
As their Hosanna's harmonising trend
Upwards; &mdash; as they upon Jehovah call,
Who was, and is, and shall be evermore and all!

The crystal hunter as he makes his way,
Looking upon his treasure with amaze,
When now the long-sought jewel shoots its ray,
Rapturous he offers up to Heaven his praise;
The poet makes his prayer in minstrel lays,&mdash;
The mountain gives it in its thousand rills,&mdash;
The traveller when he to his own ear says,
"How grand!" while his moist eye with gladness fills,
While clap their hands the floods, and sing the merry hills!

Hear! &mdash; 'Tis God's voice amidst hills primitive,
While tremble at his wrath yon spiry peaks,
As they their torrents to the cataracts give,
As now the red fire o'er the white mount breaks,
As now again from riven cloud God speaks!
ARVERON in chorus on his cold bed raves,
The ice reflects it in its sea-green creeks,
The lonely wanderer quits the coastless waves,
MONTAVERT'S glassy sea the pilot no more braves!

Bursts from its silent bed the avalanche,
The frightened marmot gives discordant cry,
The giant hills of Savoy through their range:
The chamois to their crystal dwellings fly.
All nature labouring seems in agony,
The valley dweller shrinks himself within,
The mountaineer his chalet seeks on high,
The Infidel unwashed of his sin,
Kneels, and makes silent, pale confession at the din!

Farewell ye Lauwines and ye frozen sea!
Reluctant, like your waves, I take my way;
Those waves which keel ne'er touched I now must flee,
For now the forked lightnings round thee play,
While thunders mutter through thy caverned way,
Echoing throughout thy chambers with loud mock,
Awful as if 'twere God's own judgment day!
As loud as if 'twould split the aged rock,
As if 'twould bend and crumble at the deafening shock!

'Tis past! &mdash; Again yon ancient cloud-built spire
Peers silvery &mdash; dark though still the valley deep,
Thy steep cold mountain seems some cubits higher,
As 'neath thy summit gathering vapours weep.
Loud from their founts the flying billows sweep,
Lightnings re-seek their cauldron beds; the glen
The blithe goats; once more from their shelter creep 
The chamois, peering from their rocky den,
The restless wayfarer his pathway seeks again!

Like a lone bark committed to the sea.
Methinks as now I mount again thy side,
As every ice wave was my tomb to be,
I see in thee one great devouring tide
Would swallow all things, reckless, cold and wide.
Remorseless as thou seem'st at seas like this,
Seas though they move not, know not to subside.
Trembles the mariner, where one step to miss
Sends him at once entombed into a dark abyss.

STANZAS, WRITTEN, UPON VISITING THE CASTLE OF CHILLON, AUGUST, 1829.
What is yon gloomy tower seen half in air,
And dipping half beneath imprisoning wave,
That bids the tenant in his cell despair,
Mock'd by the waters in his dungeon grave,
Those centinels which his cold prison lave?
'Tis Chillon's walls whose base is far below,
And yet ere this there have been dwellers there;
Worms? &mdash; ay, and man; &mdash; yon pillar read, and, lo,
See here, &mdash; mark well the print of all-devouring woe!

Is there no thunder-bolt?  Ye levins, dash
These turrets to their trembling base, and shake
Their dark, death-stained abodes, with deaf'ning crash,
That so the battlements may trembling quake
Come from your sulphurous dens of fire, and rake
Their slimy walls, which, could they speak, would tell
Tales that would cause the writhing heart to ache;
Come, e'en though late, and break the iron spell
Prepared by monsters foul from murky caves of hell.

Shame to the country of the brave and free,
It seems as now within thee thou didst hide,
As now thy sentry's falling feet I see
Upon thy bridge of chains that sweeps the tide,
As destined still thy tortures to abide,
A prisoner thou didst in thy grasp contain,
Another Bonivard in virtue tried;
Else why thy wonted guard pace thus retain?
Stain to Helvetia's sons, her hills enduring stain!

Perish, ye towers, in your own deep abyss,
Dungeons, racks, chains, for slaves alone are meet!
Would our eyes might thy ghastly bastions miss,
As peering o'er thy waves, no more to beat
In mockery of those within &mdash; no feet
Scoop out an altar against tyranny,
Learning their own lone echos to repeat!
That heaven would urge its long withheld decree,
And reckless power, unhallowed vengeance no more be!

TO THE JUNGFRAU.
AFTER WITNESSING AN AVELANCHE.
O'er thee, Jungfrau, his own pure garb of white
The Everlasting's hand hath lavish'd spread.
Veiling thy features from th' unhallowed sight
Of man who would thy path forbidden tread
With foot unblest, thy Heaven-communing head;
Heedless of warning which with awful sound
Thou from thy craggy shrine gav'st loud and dread,
Such as thy bravest climbers might astound,
Seeming to say, "Go hence! &mdash; know this is holy ground."

As if God spoke himself from his own mount,
Thy mighty voice sounds like a rushing wind.
Issuing as if 'twere from its genuine fount,
Mysterious, awful &mdash; heard yet undefined,
All symbols of the great Creator's mind.
The trembling snows forth from their fissures leap,
While to their standard other stores they bind,
And as they muttering move in one vast heap.
Pines, chalets, herds o'erturn in one fell deadly sweep.

MEYRINGEN. &mdash; HASLI.
REICHENBACH.
HASLI!  thou valley of a thousand streams!
Or to the eye or ear thou giv'st delight,
Such and so rich art thou like the day-dream
Of poet, when he takes his silent flight,
When dwelling in his own creation bright;
When lulled by distant waterfall, his muse
Obeys his bidding from the Aonian height,
His pent-house lid besprinkled with her dews,
When he Castalia's maid of inspiration woos.

Thou art of Liberty the chosen seat!
Wanderers from home by famine struck, in thee
The brave Norwegians found a safe retreat
Within thy snow-crowned walls; nor asked, when free,
Than thy protection better destiny;
Return for this thou hadst e'er since; their arm,
(For that thou gav'st them then, thy panoply,)
To guard each pass, to keep thee free from harm:
Such power in Freedom's wand!  such its resistless charm!

Thy snowy hills a rampart spread around,
Meet garrison for those with angel form,
Who tread thy vale with icy coronet crowned,
With sinew knit, and heart to brave the storm
Which knows at times thy region to deform;
Sworn there to take their stand upon thy soil.
For shelter given in good time, grateful, warm,
Where thy cold floods within their cauldron boil.
Dinning the crags among with ceaseless, mad turmoil.

Thy torrents blanched look like the running snow,
Throwing their angry tears up to the sky,
Reproachful, gathering fierce rage as they go,
As they the vale approach, as now they nigh
The gentler Aar with brow of rainbow dye,
Foaming like one bent upon desperate end,
That scarce we can believe so tranquilly,
Their waves they should with other waters blend,
Embrace the wandering stream below and with it wend.

Quitting reluctantly their fountain head,
The ice-isled ocean, when the god of day
Calls them to life from out their gelid bed,
When into life by his all-piercing ray,
Kindled, unwilling they pursue their way,
Roll on and upwards cast indignant spray,
As if existence, &mdash; life were but a bane;
So move thy floods, O Reichenbach!  with proud disdain.

THE RIGHI
AT SUNRISE.
A Mountain worshipper I climb the steep,
Seeking thy craggy culm with silver shine:
To hear, to see the noisy torrent leap,
Where moves invisible the hand divine;
No labour dear to bow at such a shrine!
As greets the seaman's ear when fair the gale.
So welcome is the mountain breeze to mine,
When at the early dawn I leave the vale,
Nearer to Heaven to give its Monarch an &mdash; "All hail!"

I seek the silver minaret of yon Alp:
'Tis not the works of mortal arm I scan;
Of Him who bad to rise the rugged scalp,
To view with wonder, silent praise the plan
Those mighty hills on high forbid to man,
Such as we search for with an awful eye
Paths against which the Lavange puts his ban,
With whose high pinnacles the storm-clouds vie,
Where last at eve and first at morn the sun-beams lie.

Best seen from thee, thou Queen of Hills, from storm
When free thy culm, we see thy mighty shade,
Wondering, behold below thy giant form;
Not, as at riper day, upon the blade
That decks the vale when flies the flitting shade,
But cast at anchor on the cloudy wave,
The sea of clouds by misty vapour made,
While 'neath the veil the waters find a grave,
While in their coronachs the deafening cataracts rave!

To raise our eyes once more &mdash; to look around,
Leaving the mist-enhum'd waves below:
As the sun rises, lights the enchanted ground,
Each peak, each dome, giving his ruddy glow,
The stream of life is felt quicker to flow,
Each care is lulled as by a charm to rest
Life's current then is felt more blithe to glow,
A joyful calm then sits upon each breast,
Feeling as if of all its penalty divest.

Not e'en the tale which the guide loves to tell
Of one disclaiming warning voice and power
Unwilling granted, disobeyed, who fell
From brink of precipice in hapless hour:
A tale at which the bravest well might cower;
This but a moment the light heart can quell,
When now the pilgrim's thought, like the hill's tower.
As we now on the mighty pageant dwell,
As now with higher faith and praise our bosoms swell.

Where could the Evil One have shown his guile,
Where find for man ambitious such a bait,
As when from hills like these, with hateful wile,
Bent on man's ruin, tempting, he lay wait,
With treachery fell, with heart of deadly hate?
What man less than the Almighty's Son of sway
Could bide such proffer, but had been elate?
Could look upon such hills around, and say,
"Get thee behind me, Tempter: &mdash; God, thee I obey!"

GOLDAU &mdash; ART.
'Tis done: &mdash; that which a garden was, a grave
Is now &mdash; one granite grave: &mdash; list to the shriek
The sound of those who, while they perish, crave
Assistance, &mdash; sounds of stifled prayer which break
From those whose fate yon massy hillocks speak:
Where buried lie beneath the village fane
The shatter'd village spire, which now to seek
Were vain, o'erwhelm'd and crumbled in the shock
Where Havoc's Furies take their watch, and wildly mock.

"ROSSBERG, is't thus thou shelterest thine own?
They have been wont with fondness thee to eye
From their far off small chalets sunk and gone?
Gone &mdash; overwhelm'd by one dark dire decree,
Crush'd e'en when fondly leaning upon thee?"
Thus exclaim'd GERSDORF, told of the dread doom
Of those whom most he lov'd: &mdash; "It cannot be&mdash;
My wife &mdash; my child swept sudden to their tomb&mdash;
Oh, let me to the spot, and tear them from Earth's womb!"&mdash;

Such were the words of GERSDORF, now when pale,
Horror-struck, eager he pursued his way
Tow'rds his own home, through GOLDAU'S desolate vale;
('Mid trees, 'mid rocks uptorn, his footsteps lay,)
The truth of the sad story to essay;
Death, Ruin, his impatient feet oppose,
Marking with finger the dark path as they
Seek to be told the worse, &mdash; and now with blows
Of more than manly force the lov'd ones to unclose!

With giant arm behold him throw aside
The clay, the rock, that now in scaring mound
Enclose the casket of his heart, defied
In vain, he penetrates the yielding ground.
See mark affection's power; one treasure's found!
The mother lives! &mdash; he lives himself again!
His child is not far off! &mdash; with his heart's bound
He hears it &mdash; hails it &mdash; "Now ye Heavens but deign
"This boon, renerve my arm, let not my search be vain!"

His prayer is heard!  the well known note he hears,
Imparting superhuman strength; for fly
The rocks on every side, yield as his tears
Bedew the untimely tomb, the father's eye
Enquiring, now lit up with extacy!
He sees the sought for jewel &mdash; 'mid the jar
Of elements still safe!  its notes reply!
Blest echo blest as is the peering star
That lights desponding mariner from far!

ECHO.
Where can we find of loneliness a type
Like Echo's voice when we a sound utter,
And no reply is made save that lone sound
Would seem to say, &mdash; "Thou liv'st alone, to thee
The world is dead, and thou like the last man
Hast none to hold communion sweet with thee;
To smile, to answer &mdash; useless the eye, the ear!"
What would'st thou do when thus repell'd? &mdash; seek, seek,
The inward monitor &mdash; deep scrutinize
Thyself: &mdash; there's none to interrupt thee here;
Man slums the spot where Echo dwells, for he
Loves not to hear himself arraigned; &mdash; then go,
Probe deep thy breast, look forward to the time
When Echo shall be left to sleep &mdash; thyself
Less e'en than Echo, mute as is this stream,
Deep, clear, she loves to haunt; &mdash; then bless
Thyself if in such stream a symbol thou
Find'st of thy mind &mdash; else better it had been
If thou had'st ne'er been born!...

TO A BUTTERFLY, KILLED ON A MOUNTAIN.
Emblem of immortality and love
Here and there flitting like the faithless vane,
Thy doom is sealed &mdash; no longer must thou rove;
Thy chosen home has been to thee a bane,
E'en whilst thou sip'st the flower, closed is thy reign;
Thy ample wing, with many-coloured spot,
Hath fatal proved to thee; had'st thou the plain
But kept, not such were thy untimely lot;
Who can unravel Destiny's perplexing knot?

Quick and too certain was the deadly blow!
And now thy beauty death cannot efface,
For e'en in death thy hues unfading show,
Hath in my little book perpetual place,
So bright that scarce Death's finger can we trace,
That stopped for aye thy undulating flight;
Lovely to look at as thy airy race,
Thy purple wing bears still a mealy white,
That scarce we can believe 'tis with thee endless night!

KUSNAGHT.
Unseemly tower!  I joy to think that thou
Hast met deserved fate, too long the dread
Of those who trembled round thy shattered brow.
Which, as it ought, by all hath long been fled
Save those who, like myself, scorn while they tread
The site whence issued once the mandate fell
Of thy vile lord, for aye remembered;
Which has for ever given the name of Tell
To lasting fame and thine with endless hate to dwell.

He from thy fangs escaped to teach thee, he
Who for man caters looks to all the race
Who wear his image, not to sovereignty
Alone. &mdash; for all in whose same form we trace
His god-like semblance all hold equal place
In his embracing love, his mercy, where
Worlds dwell in safety; &mdash; such the boundless space
Of Him the first great cause, who every hair
Hath kindly numbered: &mdash; Tyrants, your fate beware!

KUSNAGHT.
TO THE CHAPEL ERECTED TO THE MEMORY OF WILLIAM TELL, ON THE SPOT WHERE GESLER'S LIFE PAID THE FORFEIT OF HIS CRIMES.
And have I reached thee, memorable spot&mdash;
Tyrant, where Heaven's own justice in thy fate
Showed retribution?  Be this e'er the lot
Of such as dare their fellow-creatures hate;
May doom like thine, Gesler, the heart await
Who thus with torture study how to kill;
Judgment from Heaven is sure, if sometimes late;
Lusting for cruelty thou hast thy fill,
Monster!  who spills man's blood, he his own blood shall spill!

Thou would'st be worshipp'd; &mdash; No, thro' every age
To execration handed be thy name,
Recorded in Posterity's dark page,
Let it be coupled with eternal shame,
A worse than nothingness, &mdash; a deathless fame;
"Thou blot of human nature!" they shall cry,
As they thy foiled fell purpose read, exclaim;
Clad in man's shape a monster here descry,
Treacherous, who loved, who lived, who joyed, in cruelty!

But yet thou hast not run thy course in vain;
Warning thou art to lawless power, accurst
Thou art by man; to Nature art a stain&mdash;
Content if powerful to be the worst;
For blood, for agony quenchless thy thirst!
Could not the father's fate thy hate suffice,
Tho' from each eye, each tongue, abhorrence burst,
But thou to tear the heart-strings must devise?
Sentence 'gainst which all Nature loudly cries!

Against his own life-blood to raise his arm,&mdash;
And call'st thou such decree mercy? &mdash; to spare?
But Heaven avenged the wrong and lent a charm;
Of Innocence and Infancy the care
Gave to a guardian cherub, this the lair
Of guilt makes harmless; thus an outstretched hand
In secret guards the death-devoted pair,
Decrees the father should not be unmanned,
Decrees that vice should perish, Freedom bless the land!

LUCERNE LAKE. &mdash; KUSNAGHT. &mdash; VEQUISSE.
As now from thee, KUSNAGHT, I trace my way,
Near to the lake or 'neath the RIGI'S side,
As sinks beneath thy crags, PILATE, the day,
And all things seem in stillness to subside,
Scarce heard the murmuring of the mimic tide;
So blithe the peasant, and her song so sweet
Of mountain nymph, methinks I could abide
For aye in this sweet valley, this retreat,
For Tyranny, for Slavery sojourn all unmeet.

And now the moon sends down her transient light!
No voice is heard save of the ceaseless rill!
Dark though Mount Pilate, still yon church is bright,
As is yon garden grave that lies so still,
While yet a softer day hangs on yon hill.
What!  shall the living too sleep like the dead?
And can this be, immortal man, thy will?
Churlish to Nature, will you droop your head
When such a scene invites? &mdash; Reason her seat hath fled!

Glad now to leave behind ought that might bring
To mind the tyrant den, again my way I bend,
Glad flow the past behind me thus to fling,
To look on that where mingling beauties blend,
Yon lake &mdash; yon moon &mdash; you heights, to which I bend.
And now, Vequisse, thy lisping keels I hear
Of anchored barks, which their soft whispers lend
To the still Night, cadence to memory dear,
The only sound that soft assails the listening ear.

Oh, I could sit, and look from out the pane,
'Till dawn arose, and mingling with the hue
Of night, uncertain whose turn 'twere to reign.
Motionless, yet unsated with the view,
The scene as still as if it were not true;
So could I muse till sounds crept on my ear,
Like a fond lover loathe to say &mdash; Adieu,
'Till Memory lent a joyous, grievous tear,
'Till with a sigh I wished that all I loved were near.

But I must lie me down and close the lid,
Though sleepless it 'gainst such decree rebel,
Deeming it sacrilege, the act forbid;
Yet must I lie me down, tho' my heart's swell
Would say 'tis vain, and other story tell;
Yet I obey, though all I hope &mdash; aye, all,
Is like the sick 'twixt sleep and dream to dwell;
Or rather like the slave of night in thrall.
Who woos unheard, vainly on slumber wont to call.

LUCERNE, WRITTEN ON THE BRIDGE, SUNDAY, AUG. 1827.
The sunbeam dances upon Lucerne's bay,
Glistening, at intervals, on many an oar:
The pleasure boat glides on in listless play,
The light wave sparkling seeks the pebbly shore,
While in the distance tower the snow peaks hoar.
Quick step, light heart, costume more gay bespeak
Relief from toil &mdash; toil for a season o'er.
Round Rigi Culm &mdash; Pilate's escarped peak,
The fleecy clouds in sportive humour blend and break.

With awning shelter from the sun, the beach
A boat I see approach, &mdash; the gifted strand,
Now bidding fair the crowding coast to reach;
Pilgrims, they carry each their staff or wand,
They nearer come &mdash; and now behold they land
Pilgrims to what shrine bent?  Pleasure the meed
They seek, &mdash; the mountains sealed with God's own hand,
That hand which man had stained with tyrant deed,
But the good God said &mdash; No! &mdash; the tyrant let him bleed!


THE JURA MOUNTAINS, ON MY RETURN.
Thou envious cloud!  thou friend yet foe to man!
Friend when thou givest the too ardent sight
The mountains higher dome alone to scan,
Keeping the half or all below in night;
'Tis thus, Mont Blanc!  thou com'st in all thy might!
Then Fancy spreads her pinions, lofty soars,
Expands, creates, embellishes each height,
Imagines bays and seas, and rock and shore,
Brings forth her riches, feasts on her exhaustless store!

TO THE MEMORY OF GEORGE CANNING, WRITTEN AMONGST THE JURA MOUNTAINS, WHERE THE AUTHOR WAS FIRST INFORMED OF THE LOSS ENGLAND HAD JUST SUSTAINED.
Poplar &mdash; methinks as now I turn my ear
To list the sighing sound amid thy leaves,
As from the lulls far off &mdash; anon &mdash; now near
It comes by fits, thy trembling limbs it heaves.
Methinks thy voice sobs like a mourner's, when
It breaks solemn and sad from yonder glen,
Heard in Mount Jura, in her woods, the vale
Which saddens like Britannia at the tale.
"Canning's no more!" upon whose gifted tongue
Senates applauding loud with rapture hung.

Mourn it ye mountains where his spirit roams,
Raise high your voices in your rocky homes,
Let every hill, and those most near the sky,
Too near for man to Jura's voice reply.
Each wine-clad valley let it catch the strain,
Let Erin's isle reverberate again,
For gone is he who would have broke her chain....

MARIA OF MONT-BLANC.
Oh!  tell me, tell me who is she,
Blest with a soft, yet glowing mien,
Who the blanched mountain treads with glee
Maria of Mont-Blanc I ween!

She her own true love to meet
Fresh from the perilous glacier,
With eager eye prepares to greet,
Anxious his well-known voice to hear.

And has she left her cairn chalet?
'Tis Love that urges her to dare
The giant hill &mdash; the icy sea;
Enough had been Maria's prayer!

But Love can never danger know,
Safety seems ever at his side;
Then verdant meed becomes the snow,
The torrent wrath the gentle tide.

So thought Maria as unken'd
She followed Julien, void of fear,
As she beheld him upwards trend,
While he recked not the maid was near.

And ev'n when now a darksome cloud
The faithful pair was thrown between,
Spite of the flash &mdash; the thunder loud&mdash;
His path by Love's keen eye was seen!

This track it must be his! &mdash; Oh, yes
'Tis Fate that tells me so &mdash; then here
His toil-worn frame to hail and bless
I'll sit me down-prepare his cheer.

Oft thus Maria to defy
The crevice learnt, the crag to spurn,
To greet him with the glowing eye
Of welcome, on his glad return.

Oft Julien couched on snowy bed,
The stars for his bright canopy,
Beneath the shivering tent when spread.
Listened to the rude lullaby

Of avelanche &mdash; then his humble roof
Came in his broken sleep to mock;
Far off then wished the Goute's woof,
While harder felt the Mulet's rock.

Julien, his comrades homewards wend,
Quick jump the crevice &mdash; fond lips meet,
A joyous welcome speak, and lend
A charm can make e'en danger sweet!

A day past &mdash; and again the beam
Of summer sun the guiding hand
Asks of the mountaineer &mdash; the dream
Is fled &mdash; start forth the venturous band.

They mount the icy wave elate,
Snow pillow find gain &mdash; the morn
Breaks on their pallet chill &mdash; Oh, Fate
Would thou wert of thy dark veil shorn!

Scorning or danger, steep, or cold,
The lovely maid of Chamouny,
By custom as by love made bold,
Is towards the mountain seen to hie;

Scarce fleeter e'en that airy thing
With pinion bright that loves to soar,
In summer's ray that spreads its wing,
When winter comes &mdash; its gambols o'er.

And now she seeks DU MIDI'S peak,
Where hangs the Lauwine o'er its prey,
Threat'ning with sudden swoop to break:
The rough MORAINE stops not her way!

Once more Maria kens the mark
Where Julien trod the yielding snow,
An ice gulph stops her way. &mdash; Oh!  hark!
What sound is that?  'Tis from below!

Now silent all, and cold as Death-
No nothing stirs!  All &mdash; all is still!
All buried seem or shroud beneath,
Save dark snow-bird with yellow bill.

Too fleet, sad Truth, with dark wing flies,
Dark moving forms the mantle white
Of Nature blurring she descries;
They now approach her hopes to blight!

No Julien with them! &mdash; now more near
They come! &mdash; He should have led the way;
Alas!  my Julien is not there!
"Their looks I read! &mdash; Ah!  luckless day!"

&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;

"I heard his last note &mdash; 'twas my name!
From the deep cleft his last breath came!
His death-clothes a snow sheet at last!
His requiem the wailing blast!
An icy cavern is his grave,
There where cold torrents ever rave!
Oh!  yes!  I know &mdash; there &mdash; there he's hid!
Beneath yon icy pyramid!
Ye Spirits of the icy deep,
Oh!  let me with my Julien sleep!
Make room my Julien by thy side;
Enough for both! &mdash; The grave is wide!"
Ask you the sequel of my tale?
Below you'll find it in the vale.
The thundering avelanche, whose doom
Swept Julien to his frozen tomb,
More havoc made &mdash; it swept away
From poor Maria reason's ray.

Sometimes she's seen at early morn
Seeking the glacier all forlorn,
Anon in to the glassy spring
Muttering, is seen wild flowers to fling;
Pointing to distant pinnacle,
The crag round which no snows can dwell.
"See yonder! &mdash; 'tis my Julien's bed!
Yon towering tombstone at his head!
By the Snow King raised in a night,
It rose at morn in all its might!
His giants work when others sleep,
And while they work 'tis said they weep
As I do now!" &mdash; then falls the tear
Upon her Julien's fancied bier;
Now with her stray locks &mdash; hapless child
She dries her lids &mdash; and gazes wild&mdash;
Now laughs &mdash; now sings her saddening song&mdash;
It is Maria of Mont-Blanc!

TO MY BATON.
No; I can ne'er forsake thee or forget
Thee, thy Baton, whose sight my heart doth cheer;
Thee, whom when grasping on the hills, I met
So many kindred souls to memory dear,
Could I so graceless prove to Heaven, may ne'er
Its gifts be shower'd on me again!  May I
Forgotten be by those to whom most dear
I fain would be, by those whose memory
I value &mdash; drop into the grave without a sigh!

But I can ne'er prove such a changeling &mdash; thee
I e'er must cherish, gifted with a charm,
Who gav'st my steps a magic ecstacy,
When thou thy faithful aid gav'st to my ann.
In my breast quelling every new alarm,
Gave me o'er icy seas, 'bove clouds to tread,
The brink of precipice, safe from all harm,
To seek, O ARVERON, thy restless bed.
By thee in all my walks, my many wanderings led.

PARIS.
THE LUXEMBOURG GARDENS.
This walk is all too gay for me,
I love the wood-path, mountain wild,
Where I may roam untrammel'd &mdash; free&mdash;
More meet for Nature's humble child.

I love to view the high Alps boar,
Clad with the robe of Age's snow.
To hear the tumbling torrent roar.
To list its deep, indignant flow

To climb at morn the rugged steep,
Live on the awful still profound;
Where winter, summer, empire keep,
In bonds of harmony around.

There Flora loves her shrubs to strew,
Chaplet for Hymen's brow to bind,
Flowers of each perfume and hue,
Sowing with odour each rough wind.

What though ofttimes the Lavange heap
O'er these an alabaster tomb,
A pyramid with noisy sweep,
They yet again shall blithely bloom.

For still beneath its cold bed, Earth
Protects them with immortal glow,
Saves them from Death, or gives new birth,
From unseen fires that burn below.

LINES.
ADDRESSED TO A BUTTERFLY SEEN FLYING ABOVE THE SUMMIT OF MONT BLANC.
Hail to thee, thou little fly,
Uplifted by that beauteous wing,
Rich in each ever varying dye,
That greets the gay, enraptured eye,
Tints such as the clouds of evening brine,
As sets the sun that paints the sky.
Not idly lent those wings that lift
Thee thus so high have been assigned,
The type of the immortal mind,
To earthly man Heaven's brightest gift.
Earth scorning thus with rapid flight,
As high as thought, as fancy swift,
They hear thee from the realms of night,
Above man's reach, this mountain white.
While toil-worn man with faltering feet,
The steep ascends leaves those beneath,
The purer air thy winglets beat,
And while he draws his hurried breath,
Like that foretells the hour of death,
Thou gambol'st here aloft and fleet,
And as thou flit'st thou seem'st to say,
"This is to higher realms the way,&mdash;
Leave the cold earth and come away!

A SWISS SONG,
FROM A LOVER TO HIS MISTRESS.
I'll roam no more if thou'lt consent
To share with me my humble home!
With this, if thou wilt he content,
A wanderer no more I'll roam.

When my lone step traced mountain stream.
By fount as crystal clear, and sweet,
Thou we'rt the image of my dream,
Echo thy name learnt to repeat.

Thy whispering voice came as the sun,
Tipped each high Alp with roseate hue,
When the fire-god, his labour done.
Bade to the hills his last adieu.

And when with kiss of light and love,
The sun his favourite spot was seen
To seek again, loth thence to move,
Thou in my memory still wert green.

Then share with me my humble shed,
I would not wish an ampler dome!
Too blest with thee, Janette, to wed.
No more a wanderer to roam.

THE PALAIS ROYAL
SUNDAY EVENING, SEPTEMBER 1827.
Fountain, thou seem'st to woo and court in vain
Yon Moon, who from her mantle dark with eye
Of pride looks down, as if she would not deign
To notice thy advances, would deny
Her light, more pleased her beams should hidden lie
Yon darksome cloak beneath; for now her ray
Again is hid, lost 'mid yon pitchy sky,
Scorning as if on other wave to play,
Save upon rock, or wood, river, or silent bay!

Clouds spreading wide, dark with unheeded gloom,
Hang ominous above thy palace walls,
Awful as brooding though they were with doom,
As was the writing of the hand when all
The Eastern wassailers in tap'stried hall
Were sudden driven from seats bedecked with gold,
Nor as now scorning swift on Heaven to call,
Their high crowned host by mystic scroll when told
His power, his forfeit life he should no longer hold!

In every window-pane a glittering light,
As innocent joy was there that knows to win
The heart.  The diamond taper sparkles bright,
But are no sounds heard save of mirth within?
Bursts not by fits the sound of other din?
Can it be so when lusts there for his prey
The talloned harpy &mdash; is't then free from sin?
Are there no sounds of other key?  Oh!  say;
Speak &mdash; own deeds there are done that may not meet the day.

Say; is not disappointment heard his teeth
To gnash?  Say:  is not rage and murder there,
Roses above and poison underneath,
Than ruffian's worse is there not treachery's lair?
Folded in serpent scale deathless despair?
Say; does not Vice hold her Circean throne.
Repentance chained with her companion Care?
Chance there the only Deity's that known,
The only God they worship!  Reason they all disown!

This day when God well pleased to find complete
His work, called it a Sabbath-Day of rest&mdash;
Proud of his work fresh from his hand, as meet,
He might, he issued from on high behest;
That this day henceforth should for aye he blest!
Well keep ye his command!  like Moloch's race
Thy children sacrifice, thy worship test;
Homage of nought save pleasure can we trace!
Heathens, of God's own prophets ye have ta'en the place!

UPON READING AN ODE WRITTEN BY MRS. &mdash; OF BATH, IN WHICH SHE DESCRIBES SAPPHO IN THE ACT OF THROWING HERSELF AND LYRE DOWN THE LEUCADIAN ROCK.
SAPPHO!  thy lyre was but unstrung
When from Leucadia's lofty rock,
By thee it was all wildly flung;
(For so of thee old song hath sung:)
A Muse was near to break the shock,
Who away bore
To other shore
That lyre, now heard soft Avon's banks among.

One there most like thyself doth stray,
And strikes once more thy long lost shell,
In tones that mind us of thy lay,
Once heard in the Leucadian bay;
Adding her soft notes to its swell
Like to the bee
Of Arcady
When sipping honey from each fairy bell!
