The deep affection of a mother's soul
O who can paint?  The vivid glow of love,
Like the firm needle on the distant pole,
Or the fair bow that spans the skies above,
Abides the tempest, as the dappled dove
Broods o'er her fledgelings when the howling gale
Sweeps o'er the heavens, and rives the blooming grove;
O love is firmer than the hauberk's mail,
Though delicate its frame, mellifluent the tale.

While the fair cherub, hung upon the breast,
Smiles on the eye, that beams in blissful glow,
Fond fancy culls each flower among the blest,
Invokes the charms, that live in heaven below,
A robe to deck, o'er which the heart will throw
Its tender passion's perfume, and array
The guileless infant; hope will incense strow
Around its path where genial zephyrs play,
And the high angels grave in heaven its natal day.

When manhood rises agile and alert,
And time has seized his young, unruffled years,
When infant mild!  thou art not what thou wert,
And the rude world in dismal garb appears,
Parental love another vestment wears,
Yet decked with finer gems, and brighter hues;
The eye's impearled with less of saline tears,
But a deep feeling lingers in its views,
And every noble deed its vision keen pursues.

Within the mother's bosom dwells a store
Of all, that beautifies terrestrial life,
Imbibed not from the metaphysic lore
Of warring sophists, nursed in ceaseless strife,
But with the holy thought of heaven rife;&mdash;
Untainted, undeluding, and sincere,
The joyous mother, and the loving wife,
Fair woman heeds not menace, knows not fear,
When virtue is assailed, or pity craves a tear.

She was the acme of unnumbered worlds!
She was the festoon, that arrayed the fane
Of nature &mdash; and when the Archangel's fury hurls
The dome of earth to ruin, o'er the plain,
That spreads on high, will float the raptured strain
Of heavenly choirs on innocence and love!
Eternal Wisdom in his ruth did deign
To pair the eagle with the tender dove,
And in celestial unison they live and move.

If wanton fascinations lead astray
The heedless youth, and plunge the darling child
In revelry's dark abyss &mdash; if the ray
Of light and hope is quenched by folly wild,
If the full heart by no dim gleam's beguiled,
And death broods o'er the mother's pride and care,
A lingering flush her pallid cheek will gild,
And flash along the gloom of black despair,
E'en while she treads his grave, and heaven assails in prayer.

O sacred love that never knows decay!
O faithful guardians of our infant hours!
Unknown to pomp, and glittering array,
Are the beautiful, odoriferous flowers,
That hang around the woodland's umbered bowers.
Yet they enshield us from the solar glow;
So woman, witness, ye Supernal Powers,
Guards us in youth, ere opening mind can know
The countless ills of life, that whelm us in their flow.

Then while existence, in its fleet career,
Displays the hand that reared the tender germ,
While the fond soul doth all the vestments wear,
Flung by affection round the pensile form,
Ere the heart feels the fierce corroding worm,
Let gratitude sincere libations shed,
And gild of time each rapid rolling term;
So noble nations, in sweet virtue bred,
Will mercy mild revere, and deprecate all dread.
