I.
Fancy!  Nymph, that loves to lye
On the lonely Eminence;
Darting Notice thro' the Eye,
Forming Thought, and feasting Sense:
Thou!  that must lend Imagination Wings,
And stamp Distinction, on all worldly Things!
Come, and with thy various Hues,
Paint and adorn thy Sister Muse.
Now, while the Sun's hot Coursers, bounding high;
Shake Lustre on the Earth, and burn, along the Sky.

II.
More than Olympus animates my Lays,
Aid me, o'erlabour'd, in its wide surveys;
And crown its Summit with immortal Praise:
Thou, aweful Grongar!  in whose mossy Cells,
Sweetly musing Quiet dwells:
Thou!  deep, beneath whose shado'wy Side,
Oft, my sick Mind serene Refreshment took,
Near the cool winding of some bubbling Brook:
There have I, pensive, press'd the grassy Bed,
And, while by bending Arm sustain'd my Head,
Stray'd my Charm'd Eyes o'er Towy's wand'ring Tide,
Swift as a Start of Thought, from Wood to Mead,
Glancing, from dark to bright, from Vale to Hill,
Till tir'd Reflection had no Void to fill.

III.
Widening, beneath the Mountain's bushy Brow,
Th' unbounded Landskip softens off below;
No skreeny Vapours intervene;
But the gay, the splendid Scene,
Does Nature's smiling Face all open show,
In the mix'd Glowings of the tinctur'd Bow.
And, gently changing, into soft and light,
Expands immensely wide, and leads the journeying Sight.

IV.
White, on the rugged Cliffs, Old Castles rise,
And shelter'd Villages lie warm and low,
Close by the Streams that at their Bases flow.
Each watry Face bears pictur'd Woods, and Skies,
Where, as the Surface curls, when Breezes rise,
Faint fairy Earthquakes tremble to the Eyes.
Up thro' the Forest's Gloom, distinguish'd, bright,
Tops of high Buildings catch the Light:
The quick'ning Sun a show'ry Radiance sheds,
And lights up all the Mountain's russet Heads.
Gilds the fair Fleeces of the distant Flocks;
And, glittering, plays betwixt the broken Rocks.
Light, as the Lustre of the rising Dawn,
Spreads the gay Carpet of yon level Lawn:
Till a steep Hill starts horrid, wild, and high,
Whose Form uncommon holds the wond'ring Eye;
Deep is its Base, in Towy's bord'ring Flood,
Its bristly Sides are shagg'd with sullen Wood:
Towers, ancient as the Mountain, crown its Brow,
Aweful in Ruin, to the Plains below.
Thick round the ragged Walls pale Ivy creeps,
Whose circling Arms the nodding Fabrick keeps;
While both combine to check th'insulting Wind,
As Friends, in Danger, mutual Comfort find.

V.
Once a proud Palace, This, &mdash; a Seat of Kings!
Alas!  th' o'erturning Sweep of Time's broad Wings!
Now, 'tis the Raven's bleak Abode,
And shells, in marbly Damps, the inbred Toad.
There the safe Fox, unfearing Huntsmen, feeds;
And climbs o'er Heaps of Stone to pendant Weeds.
The Prince's Tenure in his Roofs of Gold,
Ends like the Peasant's homelier Hold;
Life's but a Road, and he who travels right,
Treats Fortune as an Inn, and rests his Night.

VI.
Ever changing, ever new,
Thy Scenes, O Grongar!  cannot tire the View:
Lowly Vallies, waving Woods,
Windy Summits, wildly high,
Rough, and rustling in the Sky!
The pleasant Seat, the ruin'd Tower;
The naked Rock, the rosy Bower;
The Village and the Town, the Palace and the Farm,
Each does, on each, reflect a doubled Charm;
As Pearls look brighter on an Aethiop's Arm.

VII.
Southward, along the Mountain's waving Side,
The Vale grows liberal, and the Prospect wide.
Glowing, beneath a kind and purply Sky,
Broad flower-dress'd Meadows and rich Pastures lie.
Green Hedges, in long Parallels, are seen;
And silv'ry Lawns draw Streaks of Light between:
Distant, those Thorns diminish'd scarce appear;
As Dangers scape, unseen, that are not near.
Smiling, like this fair Prospect, soft and gay,
The flatt'ring Glass of Hope our Future shows;
But Ills, at hand, their Face, unmask'd display,
And Fortune rougher still when nearer, grows:
Still we tread, tir'd, along the same deep Way;
And still the present proves a cloudy Day.
O, may I ever with my self agree,
Nor hope the unpossess'd Delights I see!
Nobly content, within some silent Shade,
My Passions calm, and my proud Wishes laid:
Ne'er may Desire's rough Sea beneath me roll,
Drown my wish'd Peace, and tempest all my Soul!
While, idly busy, I but beat the Air,
And, lab'ring after Bliss, embosom Care!

VIII.
Here, while on humble Earth, unmark'd I lie,
I subject Heav'n and Nature to my Eye;
Solid, my Joys, and my free Thoughts run high.
For me, this soft'ning Wind in Zephyrs sings,
And in yon flow'ry Vale perfumes his Wings.
To sooth my Ear, those Waters murmur deep;
To shade my Eye, these bow'ry Woodbines creep.
Wanton, to yield me Sport, these Birds fly low;
And a sweet Chase of Harmony bestow.
Like me too yon sweet Stream serenely glides;
Just views and quits the Charms which tempt its Sides:
Calmly regardless, hast'ning to the Sea,
As I, thro' Life, shall reach Eternity.
