'Twas at a City-Feast for honours won
By Midas, Mammon's darling son,
Stuck up in solemn state
His purse-proud worship sat,
A sugar-cask his throne.
The wealthy Aldermen were plac'd around;
The least of whom was worth ten thousand pound;
So shou'd desert in industry be crown'd:
In all the pomp of Asia's pride,
There sat majestic Nabobs by his side,
Who the poor, prostrate Great-Mogul bestride:
Mighty!  mighty!  mighty band!
None but directors empires shou'd command.

The more the feast to grace,
The city-music had their proper place,
Where to an antient harp new-strung,
A bard accompanying sung.

His song began
With celebration of the man
Who, with noble thirst of glory fir'd,
To be a Member and Lord-May'r aspir'd;
But what was greater still,
With high protests and low-life'd words at will,
A famous orator he grew,
And all antagonists o'erthrew;
He speech'd it, rav'd, and bounc'd;
Till soon to bind his brows there was decreed
A garland of green oyster-weed,
While all, him God of Billingsgate pronounc'd.

The listening croud catch at the striking sound;
A present deity!  the stucco roofs rebound:
Great Midas hears,
Elate appears,
Assumes the god,
Affects to nod,
And, bridling, shakes his ears.

The praise of Plutus next enrich'd the strain,
The very worshipping of whom is gain:
The golden pagod, see!  in triumph comes:
Sound the trumpets!  beat the drums!
How bright his yellow face
Shines forth with a resistless grace!
Prepare your open palms; he comes!  he comes!
Plutus, ever winning, ever great,
The joy of hoarding did the first create:
Sublime the merit
Of such a spirit!
Plutus's blessings are in heaps of treasure:
Money-getting is a noble pleasure;
Rich the treasure
Sweet the pleasure,
Sweet the pleasure springs from gain.

Though sooth'd and flatter'd with the strain,
Midas, high-rank'd among the money'd train,
Less avaritious still than vain,
Riches affected to disdain;
Which not quite grateful show'd
Where he his whole importance ow'd:
Then looking fine and bluff,
He swore he fortune had enough,
Peace and pension far above,
He courted nothing but the people's love;
Money he valued less than a good name;
And to confirm his claim,
Spoke all his speeches o'er again,
The frothy produce of a windy brain.

The master sees the folly rise,
His swelling cheeks and starting eyes;
And while with bloated airs he sense defied,
Chang'd his note, and check'd his pride.

A theme most pitiful he chose,
A theme replete with melting woes;
He sung of Midas's friend and great protector,
The patriot, orator, and hector,
(Of weathercocks oh!  wretched fate!)
Fall'n, fall'n, fall'n, fall'n!
Fall'n from the pinacle of state,
Where he perch'd had been of late,
Deserted, as he oft' had been of late,
By those of whom he once had been the admiration:
He now, alas!  while all men flout him,
With not a friend to care about him,
Dies, in a corner, like a poison'd rat.

With downcast eyes the son of Mammon sat
Revolving on that foul disgrace,
Of levity the common case.

The songster-bard well pleas'd to mark
Of sensibility some spark,
To cease his wild-goose chase of fame,
Wish'd him to understand
That often in this land
Vulgar and popular are quite the same:
The mob, he sung, were much abus'd
Who fair pretence too easily believ'd,
And if they chang'd, shou'd be excus'd,
They were not fickle then, but undeceiv'd.

From pity next for his sad friend,
He moves him to the pity of himself,
Warning him not to split on the same shelf,
Nor labor hard t' atchieve no better end.
In the calm aeolian measure,
He sings, that virtue is true pleasure,
False honor but an empty bubble;
Vanity a toil and trouble;
A life so wretchedly employ'd
Cou'dn't well be call'd enjoy'd,
While not both Indies' wealth, nor vain expence,
Cou'd e'er true dignity bestow,
Or with a silly arrogance of brow
Supply the place of solid sense.

The few applaud the well-meant song,
Unpleasing to a trivial throng:
From Mammon's son it no attention draws;
Reason, with him, was sure to lose her cause:
With native happiness oppress'd,
Nothing cou'd penetrate his callous breast;
Music, in vain, a deeper sound explores,
He yawns, nods, drops asleep, and snores.
