The Sun, now rising with unclouded ray,
Gilt the tall mountains, and reveal'd the day,
When DAMON, driving o'er the green his flocks,
Spy'd COLIN seated on the village stocks:
This the Squire's Maid inflam'd, the other youth
Fair DOLLY fir'd, fierce Emulation both.
Sneering Contempt, and pitch'd upon his crook,
The taunting Shepherd COLIN thus bespoke.

DAMON.
So early why does COLIN fly from rest?
Does Love, or conscious Guilt disturb his breast?
Is't cruel BIDDY'S frowns infests his dreams,
Or the shrill cries of Goodman HOBSON'S lambs?

COLIN.
Malicious Clown!  this insolence forbear;
Know I not whose ignoble Chains you wear?
Or dost thou think I can so soon forget
What time my cries oblig'd you to retreat
O'er yonder wall?  you dropt the gather'd fruit,
And 'midst the copse eluded our pursuit.

DAMON.
Or when you challeng'd us to sing one day
Our Mistress' praise, then meanly stole away?
This silken Handkerchief that binds my neck,
And DOLLY hem'd, if now you'd try, I'll stake
'Gainst any thing you have a mind to lose;
And see where CLODIUS opportunely goes.

COLIN.
Fool-hardy Swain!  thy silly boast I scorn;
This Coat behold, which erst the Squire has worn;
Around the cuffs and pocket-flaps are seen
The recent marks where golden Lace has been;
This will I venture, which your Pledge exceeds
As much as DOLL the filthy swine she feeds.
Begin &mdash; attentive, CLODIUS, mark our strains,
No common booty 'tis the Victor gains.

DAMON.
Now smiling May with od'rous flow'rs has spread
The meads, the trees in liveliest green array'd;
To crop the violet, oft to yonder grove
My DOLLY comes, and hears her Shepherd's Love.

COLIN.
To town when BIDDY from her COLIN flies,
Bleak Winter roars, and tempests tear the skies;
But when, with Plays and Op'ras cloy'd, she comes,
The Spring revives, and Zephyrs strew perfumes.

DAMON.
When the loud Lark forsakes the humble plains,
If DOLLY sings, he modestly refrains
Th' unfinish'd lay, the Syren's voice to hear,
And hangs self-balanc'd in the midway air.

COLIN.
When the Bell's pleasing sounds to Dinner call,
Bucks, Parsons, Gamblers fill his Worship's hall;
But if at a table blushing BIDDY wait,
With wonder seiz'd, the Guests forget to eat.

DAMON.
Where DOLLY strays, the fields more sweet perfumes
Send forth, the lawn a brighter hue assumes;
But all grow languid when the Maid's away,
Flow'rs hang their heads, and Nature feels decay.

COLIN.
When Winter strips the groves and hedges bare,
Round the Squire's House still verdant trees appear;
These, though the woods present a dreary scene,
Inviting her return, are ever green.

DAMON.
Last Valentine, by stratagems convey'd,
A tender billet reach'd the lovely Maid,
Which DOLLY seiz'd, suspecting not the cheat,
Approv'd my verse, and smil'd at the deceit.

COLIN.
On Christmas-Day, when Gentlefolks above
To kill the time, at Brag or E O strove,
Down to the kitchen, unperceiv'd, I stole,
And play'd with BIDDY at &mdash; My Lady's Hole.

DAMON.
The other day, as I return'd at noon,
DOLLY without her handkerchief or gown,
Oppress'd with heat, was careless set; I stole,
Unnotic'd, glances that inflam'd my soul.

COLIN.
Hail sacred Fashion!  at thy shrine I bow;
To thee the shorten'd Petticoat we owe,
And high-heel'd Shoe; thou gav'st the eye to gaze
O'er Fields of Bliss once hid by envious Stays.

DAMON.
Inform me, COLIN, (many a blockhead can't,
Though almost ev'ry day 'tis seen) what Plant
Is that whose stem, when cut obliquely, shows
The veil that screen'd a Monarch from his foes.

COLIN.
This quaint Conundrum if thy subtle brain,
(BIDDY admires Conundrums) can explain,
I yield the coat, and silken pledge withal&mdash;
Why is thy Bonnet like a Butcher's Stall?

CLODIUS.
For shame, ye wrangling Fools, give o'er this noise,
To neither of you I adjudge the prize;
For, both, believe me, well deserve to lose&mdash;
But, DAMON, haste, to shelter drive your Ewes,
See threat'ning clouds the morning sky deform;
Your clamours, sure, portend a dreadful storm.
