The sun by this is high above in heaven,&mdash;
Is where he doth him rest at noontide hour;
And to the shade the herd his flock has driven,
To shun the burning heat which doth o'erpow'r;
When Dinah travelled has through many a bow'r,
And many a lonely way since morning light;
Then she with Harnol brave did leave that tow'r
Where they to rest them stopp'd now many a night,
Since Harmond did the tale of Bolden brave recite.

She with the knight doth search her Lucan still;
Nor with her more the bard now wandering be,
He goeth toward Limercus fair, where will,
Ere long, him Harnol and the maiden see;
For so did they, at parting, late agree;
Then all do wander towards Limercus fair;
For, quoth the bard, 'tis in dividing, we,
To search the knight, a double chance may share;
So did they all divide to search him ev'ry where.

Nor is the bard now wandering alone;
Architon, he whom Harnol late o'ercame,
With him to search brave Lucan too is gone;
Architon's brother e'en, Bandon by name,
Who ne'er would hear of merit or true fame,
Now follows too, by Harmond's counsel won
To love of glory, such as heroes claim,
Who ever do what is ignoble shun,
And bless the soul of him who has e'er nobly done.

And on they hie until they meet a shade,
By which an aged stream did winding flow;
And there them on the grass adown they laid,
Until the burning heat of noon would go.
Oft o'er the wave the bard his eyes doth throw:
And does his look the while emotion hold;&mdash;
"O there," he cries, "I saw brave knights laid low;
Beneath the silent wave now sleep they cold;
Oh hear their tale! &mdash; methinks again all to behold.

"On yonder side the sons of Brydain are,
Winding along the strand, a numerous host,
Come from their own high snowy hills afar&mdash;
Beside the sons of many afar off coast&mdash;
And 'mid them all their chief doth shine the most;
And from fair Gaulus' land afar is he;
Nor with his throng his mighty shout is lost;
Hither it comes amid its enemy,
And calls them on to death, or glorious victory.

"Nor silent Stuart, chief of Erin land;
Amid his host, a numerous throng, he goes,
And ranges all along the noisy strand,
And doth him for the doubtful strife dispose;
And oft, the while, his shout tremendous rose,
As 'cross the stream, at times, his look he threw,
To see where Brydain's chief his station chose;
But he none has, amid his host he flew,
Which wind along the stream as far as eye may view.

"From hence, not far, a town named Norda lies,
Where do for long the sons of Brydain dwell;
And who against all Erin land did rise,
That they accuse of persecution fell.
Stuart, the king such haughty foe would quell,
And 'gainst them late with mighty force he went,
But so did they great Stuart's force repel,
That though he cruel famine mid them sent,
In vain, before their walls, long time in siege was spent.

"Of such great contest Gellimus doth hear,
And Brydain's sons from far he comes to aid&mdash;
His powers, methinks, now yonder do appear;
And his the chief that all these powers has sway'd&mdash;
The other chiefs behold around array'd
In all their arms of shining steel so bright;
Each hero's soul is in his looks display'd;
They shake their spears, and lift their swords on height,
And call again the sons of Erin land to fight.

"Nor need the sons of Erin land be called;
No fear of fight doth swell their bosoms brave;
They see their foe advance, and, unappalled,
Do rush to meet them in the bounding wave;
As tho' two worlds their seats at once should leave,
And meet with all their mountains on the sea,
So loud the burst of noise that meeting gave
Either proud host &mdash; they join in middle way,
And spears and shields at once arise &mdash; dread is the fray.

"No soul of either host doth dream of flight;
Here nought but rage, and strife, and glory all;
It is who shall be foremost in the fight,
And for his country's sake the first to fall&mdash;
And does the weakest on the mightiest call&mdash;
But foremost 'mid the throng Lucan appears,
And though half 'neath the wave he still is tall:
Thick all around him fly the glitt'ring spears:
But still he foremost is &mdash; no foe brave Lucan fears.

"His country's freedom 'tis &mdash; his country's right,
Which now doth sway the hero's noble soul;
Alone hence stands he foremost in the fight.
As tho' he would that all should 'gainst him roll.
Oh valour high! &mdash; of greatness this the whole.
But he who war for other nation tries,
Yet leaves his own in bondage to condole,
Did ne'er sure feel true valour with them rise;
Such lost to him who cannot hear his country's cries.

"Next Lucan's Berwick, Stuart's spurious son;
Than he, no chief has wonders done more great;
He looks behind and calls his squadrons on,
As he alone would Brydain's sons defeat.
Next him is Dorton, chief of soul elate;
Then Nealus, knight long known in Erin land;
And Dungan next, who rushes to his fate;
Death, with his mighty spear, flies from his hand;
Nor knight yet has he met, who may his force withstand.

"Nor wanteth ancient Brydain knights like these:
Here Gellimus doth 'mid his throng appear;
Next aged Scomberg, who all seeming sways,
With Bergs his son, a knight of youthful year;
Kalmote, Denmark, and Kirk, are fighting near;
Three noble knights all matchless in their way;
Kalmote to send aright the flying spear;
Denmark, how best the warlike steed to sway;
And Kirk to bend the bow, and death at distance lay.

"But why should I forget my valiant son,
My Harnol, who doth meet the strife with joy?
To lift the spear this day he has begun,
Yet foremost, too, I see my gallant boy;
And near him Carmol doth his post employ;
And next to him his brother Carmiline;
Both lift their spears as ready to destroy
All pow'rs that durst 'gainst Brydain's sons combine,
Though they of Erin land, but of ignoble line.

"Thus all but Stuart combat in the fight;
Another station doth the hero choose;
Aloof he is upon an ancient height,
And thence the battle in its anger views.
Nor he nor Gellimus yet 'gan to lose;
Alike does either mighty host contend;
Here with the dead some chief of Brydain strews
The bloody stream:  and here his way doth bend
Some knight of Erin land, and death around him send.

"And all the while the shouts tremendous rise,
And clang of arms, that nought but discord know;
Man, chariot, horse, &mdash; all in confusion hies,
And all with blood Bubinda stream doth flow.
First of great Brydain's chiefs Scomberg doth go,
And with him death, whither he doth him wind;
Knight after knight his arm doth overthrow,
The deeds of old are burning in his mind;
And who durst in his rage the aged hero find?

"First Arundel would meet the hero's strength,
Tall Arundel!  a knight so great in fame!
His spear of yew doth seem a yew in length,
And broad his shield beneath the heaven's flame:
Scomberg him eyes, and wields his fatal beam&mdash;
All from around the chiefs do swift retire&mdash;
As tho' the mightiest two together came
Great Arundel alone is all on fire;
He too doth wield his spear, and 'waken all his ire.

"'Rebel,' he cries, 'if others fly, think not
That Arundel like them may also fly;
Thee, as the chief, long in the fight I've sought,
And now, proud warrior, gladly hail thee nigh.'
He said, and him askaunt the chief doth eye.
'Vain Arundel, believe him not,' he cries,
'Proud rebel who to day would willing die,
That Brydain's persecuted sons might rise,
Proud rebel never in such glorious contest dies.'

"He said, and hurl'd his spear with fury fell;
On through the groaning air it angry sped,
'Till on the globe form'd shield of Arundel
Aslant it came with all its vengeance dread&mdash;
If else, the noble knight had then been dead&mdash;
Just o'er the grasp it struck the middle part,
And half the brazen round thence with it led;
The knights of Erin land do fearful start,
And even now doth beat proud Arundel's great heart.

"Yet, gathering all his strength, he sends his spear,
And onward with such rapid force it flew,
That ere his shield to ward his foe might bear,
It pierced that plate, which guards the breast, half thro',
Then sudden fell; &mdash; now both their swords swift drew,
And each towards each on through the water hies,&mdash;
They seem'd as monsters of the deep to view&mdash;
One time, for Brydain's chief, the distant cries,
One time, for Arundel of fame, they do arise&mdash;

"At once the shouts do cease &mdash; the knights have met;
Now heaviest vengeance in their minds they bore;
And with such wrath each on his foe beset,
That soon with them the contest dread is o'er&mdash;
Great Arundel of fame is then no more&mdash;
Scomberg on him a blow so furious sent,
That shield and mail, and all that came before
Its matchless force, at once beneath it bent,
'Till deep within the hero's noble heart it went.

"He falls; &mdash; all Erin land doth heave a sigh;&mdash;
As when a prop, great guardian of some tow'r,
Against the angry warfare of the sky,
Thunder or storm, or what else may o'erpow'r;
Is met by Jove at length in wrathful hour&mdash;
At once beneath his vengeful bolt it lies,&mdash;
And now the tower beholding it no more,
And hearing still the anger of the skies,
Does, with his guardian's fall, up throw his mighty sighs.

"So fell the knight, and Erin land did sigh;
E'en Scomberg for the brave doth shed a tear;
And now on thro' the host again does hie,
To weet what knight so bold that durst be near;
But none abide, all fly as herd of deer,&mdash;
Great Ashton save, who would his force withstand,
But he too falls beneath the chief's dread spear&mdash;
Full length he is upon the bloody strand;
And once again doth heavy sigh all Erin land.

"Mighty the deeds of other heroes too&mdash;
Great Gellimus, Denmark, and Ormond young;
And Kirk, and Bergs, and many others, who,
Where'er they went, pale death around them flung;
But they apart of Brydain's host among,
Remote from where the mighty chieftain fought,
'Tis where the lowly vales around them rung,
With shouts o'er deeds that valiant Lucan wrought,
And more of Erin land who death e'er with them brought.

"Nealus and Kalmote now meet in the strife;
Kalmote, that best can send the spear aright,
And mighty Nealus, who to-day, of life
Many a hero has depriv'd, in fight;
Either great host doth anxious view its knight&mdash;
Th' unerring spear first Kalmote furious sends;
Full on the casque of Nealus doth it light,
Divides it in the front, and angry rends
That part just o'er the pole, and near the neck descends.

"For Kalmote loud do shout all Brydain's host;
Nealus in wrath swift flings his spear away,
And runs against the knight with vigour most,
That ere he well has come where he doth stay,
He 'gins with might his blows around him lay!
And loud they do off Kalmote's mail resound.&mdash;
Not long the valiant knight abide them may;
Headlong he falls beneath a mortal wound,
And loud the murmur of all Brydain's host around.

"Brave Berwick and wise Walker next engage;
He is of Stuart great the spurious son,
And this a noble hero and a sage,
Who mighty fame of late at Norda won;
In council and in strife alike he shone;
But now the hero's day of pride is o'er&mdash;
Him furious doth great Berwick rush upon,
And all perforce aloft in arms upbore,
Then dashed in wrath adown &mdash; for far resounds the shore.

"As some great oak, whose fair broad front uprais'd
Has long withstood the tempests of the sky,
Is by the spirit of the whirlwind seized,
And wrapt, in all his pride of bloom, on high,
Then thence in wrath flung down to fade and die&mdash;
The vales resound, fear fills all living kind;
And swift the flocks do to the covert fly&mdash;
The herdsman fearful too a shade would find,
And hide him from the angry spirit of the wind.

"So 'neath the hero's fall the shore resounds;
And now the shouts for Erin land are great;
Her knights all deal around them deadly wounds,
And Brydain's sons 'gin tremble for their fate;
One time they stand; one time they do retreat;
And all the while great Lucan's shouts arise;
Whome'er he meets at once he doth defeat;
And now where Scomberg is afar he spies,
And toward the knight on through the throng all hasty flies.

"The hostile host on either side gives way;
Two knights already do 'neath Scomberg fall&mdash;
Dead on the strand, Gerald the strong here lay,
And here groans 'neath his wounds Arthur the tall.
This Lucan saw, and on the chief 'gan call&mdash;
Tho' far off, Scomberg eyes him presently;
And so on either vengeful comes, that all
The warring chiefs, who here around them be,
Withhold them from the strife, their mighty feats to see.

"Ere yet they meet, thus Scomberg has begun:
'Say whence the chief that durst approach me near?
Is he of noble line, and has he won,&mdash;
As I, great honour at the sword and spear?
No; him I judge one by the king sent here,
With promise great, if I should to him yield;
But mark the sword, young knight, that all do fear!
Ere thou canst meet its edge, thou long shalt wield,
As I, the warrior's spear, and win in many a field.'

"'Hold, Scomberg,' cries the knight of Erin Land;
'Think me not sprung of an ignoble line:
I, too, as you, can fame of birth demand;
Also the honor of the spear is mine:
Nor think it is the king who may incline
My soul, thro' promise, here to make thee yield;
Unbid I come where I do see thee shine;
Nor do I fear the sword that thou doest wield,
Though long I have not fought, or won in many a field.'

"He ceased; and each toward each, in wrath, rush'd on;
What were the feats of arms achieved till now
At every onset mall or plate is gone,
And each doth bend him to the mighty blow&mdash;
So would two mountain floods, on meeting, go;&mdash;
But soon a strife unequall'd so doth end:
Lucan, in wrath, a stroke directed so,
That shield or else 'twere madness to extend&mdash;
The vengeful steel through all its way did angry rend.

"As shadowy darkness flies across the hill,
When clouds bright Phoebus from the world do hide,
So sadness now all Brydain's host doth fill,
As Scomberg falls, his arms extended wide
Thus falls a spreading oak in all his pride;
The flock the tempest of the heavens foresee,
And would them from its threatening wrath to hide;
Now haste to find their own beloved tree,
But him the blast has thrown, &mdash; they know not where to flee.

"So Brydain's sons, since their great chief no more,
Now know not whither from the storm to hie;
And angry Lucan they do fly before,
As herd of deer would 'fore the hunter fly.
Loud Stuart's shout from off his hill hard by;
Half Brydain's host he sees to Lucan yield,
And his big heart with every hope is high;&mdash;
Three times he seizes on his sword and shield,
As tho' he would share in the glory of the field.

"What knight of Brydain's host the shock first stands?
'Tis Gellimus; &mdash; his great soul cannot deign
To shun the strife, and he aloud commands
The flying powers with him to remain&mdash;
They hear their chief &mdash; the strife's renewed again&mdash;
A double ardour Brydain's sons 'gin feel&mdash;
To win or fall with Gellimus they mean&mdash;
Headlong in death tall knights around do reel&mdash;
And loud the shout of war, and dread the clash of steel.

"Now Powel falls &mdash; and now great Carlingford&mdash;
And Vaudry next, that never foe did fear;
And all beneath great Gellimus' dread sword,
That hasty sendeth death both far and near:
So ruinous flies at night the lightning drear.
The screech-owls of the lonely desert scream&mdash;
They see above their rocks the flash appear,
And how it doth just near destructive gleam,
That all would willing hide them from the angry flame.

"Brave Berwick first doth mark the mighty man.
His soul is bent upon one noble deed&mdash;
In all his sounding arms he vig'rous ran,
Where hundreds 'neath great Gellimus do bleed;
Naught can abide him as he doth proceed;
Through all perforce he doth his way compel;
From far does Gellimus behold his speed&mdash;
He runs, they angry meet &mdash; but who can tell,
The heroes' noble deeds?  the son of Stuart fell.

"Many of Brydain would behold the knight,
And 'mong the rest my noble Harnol came.
All wearied is my son from cruel fight&mdash;
The blood of heroes 'long his sword doth stream&mdash;
He views the fallen chief and asks his name:
'Great was he in the strife all day,' he cries;
'Though fallen he, not so his wond'rous fame;
Yes, that shall live &mdash; in spite of all shall rise,
And wake in future day him now that lowly lies.'

"He said; and now he's with the chief alone
The others eager do the strife pursue;&mdash;
But Harnol stays &mdash; he heard the hero moan,
And thought he might his day of life renew:
He lov'd a foe whom he so brave did view,
For all the day, share in the cruel fight:
No coward action did the hero do;
When foes did fall beneath his matchless might,
He would them aid, nor e'er exulted o'er a knight.

"My son him 'side the cooling stream down lays,
And doth him of his heavy armour free;
And now the evening zephyr round him plays,
That soon again in grateful life is he;
This Harnol sees and to the strife doth flee;&mdash;
The strife that even now more dreadful grows,
None idly gaze, all in dread conflict be;
And loud the noisy din of arms and blows,
But louder still the shouts that 'mid the battle rose.

"Carmol and Carmiline now dreadful go&mdash;
Amid the strife, together is their way;
Who, single, durst approach the angry foe?
Great is the knight of Erin land who may.
Carmol marks Lucan far amid the fray&mdash;
He fears, tho' aided, to approach the knight:
But nigh a rock of rugged round loose lay;
Its bulk he seiz'd, and hurl'd with all his might,
Nor err'd, broad on the chest of Lucan did it light.

"All thoughtless of such blow down doth he fall:&mdash;
As some great rock high o'er the boisterous wave,
Doth the loud roaring deep, the storms and all,
That durst oppose in open strife outbrave,
Until some fury of the blast would leave
His proud head low, and doth a bolt on send,
Which comes unseen, and, so doth him bereave
Of every strength, that down he doth descend,
And, ruinous on the coast, his rugged bulk extend.

"So Lucan now; and Carmol's shouts are loud;
The fallen hero's shield he flies to take;
But Dorton eyes him from amid a crowd,
Of knights, where he fought for his country's sake;
Away thro' all perforce he soon doth break;
And now he flies where mighty Lucan lay:
Two knights have seiz'd the shield, but he doth make
Them dearly for the venturous deed to pay;
In death he smote the two, and bore the shield away.

"Nealus soon joins, they over Lucan stand&mdash;
Carmol arrives &mdash; he durst not meet the foe,
But hasty gains the host of Brydain's land,
Shouting aloud great Lucan's overthrow.
With whom apart Nealus and Dorton go,
And leave him breathing life hard by a stream;
Then 'mid the strife again their anger throw;
Wrath for the fallen knight doth them inflame&mdash;
They rush through Brydain's host, and none but Carmol claim.

"But he no more is seen or heard to boast;
It was, that he did hide him 'mong the slain;
Yet still the knights do search him through his host,
'Till they, at length, its rear do wearied gain;
They own their rashness then, and search so vain&mdash;
In front the sons of Erin land 'gall yield;
For Nealus and for Dorton they complain,
These hear and from the foe they would them shield,
But cannot now &mdash; their spears hundreds around them wield.

"This Gellimus, wise watchful chief, had done;
He gladly let the knights to gain his rear;
And now he in the front of battle won;
No chief, that durst approach his pow'rs, is there,
Save Dungan, he, brave knight, the shock would dare,&mdash;
But Harnol, youth, 'till now, unknown to fame,
Who ne'er before saw war, or sword did bear,
Tho' single, slew great Dungan in the stream,
All Erin land then fled, hence great was Harnol's name."

