Fair o'er the eastern hill appears the dawn!
Yet nature is, as night, all silent still
The drowsy herds lie on the dewy lawn,
Lull'd by the murmuring fall of brook or rill;
But all with Phoebus soon awaken will;
For now old Night her long career is borne,
And doth all wearied climb the northern hill,
While oft behind she throws her look of scorn
Upon Aurora bright, fair goddess of the morn.

And now fair Dinah leaves the lonely cell,
With Harnol and the bard new ways to stray,
Till tidings of her knight she may hear tell,
Whom now she b'lieves proud Carmol did not slay;
For fell Despair is from her heart away,
And Hope, with all her pleasing dreams, is there,
That like the dawn, her looks fair light display,
Fair light, that long lay bid by night of care,
And many a heavy ill, too great for maid to bear.

"O, Harmond!  now I feel of hope," she cries,
"I feel of peace, that long my soul has fled,
But you, it is, O bard!  who bid it rise,
And have the peace long flown, 'gain to me, led;
Hence never shall my gratitude be dead!&mdash;
O heavenly Hope!  how fair of mind art thou!
Why is not ev'ry bosom with thee fed?
Did e'er yet fell Despair of good bestow?
Did e'er yet tell his wretch to find of comfort how?

"No, &mdash; thus thou never didst, O fell Despair?
Then wily the wretch, possess'd by thee, so mad,
If he did ever know how Hope was fair,
To shrink beneath thy base dominion bad?
Roll on, ye evils!  be ye e'er so sad,
By fell Despair I'll never be possest;
Too mild, I'll cry, the reign 'neath Hope I've had,
To list, proud tyrant, now to thy behest,
Thou, who, with madness e'en, canst sway the wounded breast!"

"All hail!  great heaven," exclaims the holy bard!
"'Tis thou alone who canst protect from ill,
Weak is the soul itself from ill to guard,
If thou didst not, O heaven!  of strength it fill&mdash;
Then call on gracious heaven, O maid!  which will,
If thou demand, when evils at thee stare,
Its light of strength within thy soul instil,
That well may teach thee how the shock to bear,
But else what may oppose the demon of despair?

"He erst from Chaos, gloomy dwelling, came,
His sire, erewhile, too from like region sprung,&mdash;
And the nocturnal hag his mother dame,
Who ne'er had been the sons of day among;
Deep in the breast by cruel sorrow stung,
Tyrranic would he ever hold his reign,
And cares, and woes, and fears are round him clung,
E'en death doth oftentime a visit deign,
Then such is fell Despair, such Hope's destructive bane!

"But Hope the drear abode of darkness shuns,
Her birth she found beneath a brighter sky,
Where ever gracious stars and cloudless suns,
Blaze round the great Omnipotent of high.
'Twas thence to earth she first her way did try,
Sent by the sovereign hand of Jove divine,
And ever since she welcomes happiness nigh,
And tells the sad 'tis madness to repine,
And stars that darken now, another day may shine."

He said, and Harnol felt all what he said:
"I never shall," the knight within him cried,
"By thee, O fell Despair!  again be led,
Though much I feel, my soul shall all abide;
Hence none shall say, that, Spardian like, I died;
But yet, when wakes the bard of future days,
With song to tell of what did knights betide,
Some chief may hear of Harnol in his lays,
And sigh to have, like me, a soul so great in praise."

Thus Harnol silent; nor yet Dinah knew
That he the knight who her from Carmol free'd,
For, that knight's fate she oftentimes did rue,
As she did think him slain that day indeed;
Yet was he not, but 'neath his sword did bleed,
Of his great foe, full many a haughty knight,
That Carmol caused them all to cease with speed,
He fearing much to be o'ercome in fight,
By Harnol, who could all to Gellimus recite.

For, Gellimus now Brydain's mighty king;
And when he came to war with Erin-land,
His people Carmol to his side did bring,
Hence gain'd he in this country high command:
But if that Gellimus might understand,
That in his native land he was such foe,
He should not longer sway with cruel hand,
But in some dungeon tell his day of woe;
The great can never see the vanquished governed so.

Thus Carmol fearing, calls the youth no foe,
And hasty sends him off with Carmiline;
But Harnol him for Merah did o'erthrow,
For Merah, maid for whom he now doth pine;
Sisserah, that great fault was solely thine:
No more he hopes to see the blooming maid,
And hence the woes which 'gainst the knight combine,
And hence that fell Despair his bosom sway'd,
But Harmond, by Ruennah's tale, has that allayed.

And Harnol 'twas, whom, on the night just past,
Fair Dinah met, his sword uplifted high;
'Twas thou, Despair, that then pow'r o'er him hadst,
He little thought, fair maiden, you were nigh.
You fear'd, but lov'd the sight, yet knew not why;
But why, O maiden!  ere 'tis long you'll know.&mdash;
Then fare you on, and much you have to try,
But e'er, as now, a noble purpose show,
And thou shalt gain the wise and brave with thee to go.

Now Phoebus bright 'gins o'er the hill to peep,
And view how far his journey long ere night;
Nor more the herds upon the lawn do sleep,
They soon upraise them do with his fair light;
And all the world seems joyous at the sight:
Fair wood and grove with grateful song resound,
And all the hills afar are glittering bright;
Nor more in brake the lordly stag is found,
High stands he on the plain, awak'd by early sound.

When Dinah finds her through lone ways afar,
Now in dark wood, or now in silent vale,
Where even not the woodman's dwellings are,
But where dread loneliness doth e'er prevail.
And all the while the bard doth him avail
Of many a tender tale to pass the day,
Till 'gins, by this, the sun them hard assail,
From where at noon he throws his burning ray,
When they, at length, descry a house afar away.

And now the heat to shun they thither hie;
Fair plac'd the dwelling is beneath a hill;
Its stately top did seem in heavens high,
And its broad base below the vale doth fill,
And all about is shade and bow'r and rill:
Much do the knight and maiden of it say,
But Harmond it beholdeth and is still,
His soul to deep reflection all gives way,
As tho' this scene recalled some thought of early day.

Just near the dwelling lone they chanced to meet
A goodly knight fair seated on high steed,
Whom he did curb and check, as it is fit
For knight preparing him for warlike deed.
He Harnol spies, and when he doth aread,
That he must be a knight of Brydain's-land,
His mail more fast he on him makes with speed,
And raiseth high a lengthened spear in hand,
And comes against the knight, who doth his coming stand.

As some great oak withstands the mountain flood,
When sudden breaking down with angry roar,
So Harnol bold unshaken now withstood
That knight, who 'gainst him with great fury bore.
His lengthened spear at first he sends, but o'er
Brave Harnol's head aloft in air it flew,
And falling short, a youthful ash uptore,
Which near in all his bloom of beauty grew,
The forest hear his fall, and sigh his fate all through.

Not so his spear the cautious Harnol sent,
Full on the helmet of the chief it sped,
But false the point &mdash; against that part it bent
Which guards in front the centre of the head;
If else, the haughty knight had been laid dead&mdash;
But now more dread the combat doth ensue,
Fell rage them on with sword in hand quick led,
And high, with fell design, their blows they drew,
And fire, as of the furnace, from their helmets flew.

If should two bolts above in heaven strike,
And scatter all their flame and wrath below,
Then even such would Harmond say was like
The dreaded fight that he did witness now.
"My gallant boy!"  he cries aloud, " wilt thou
Yield to the foe, thou who didst never fear?
But no:  'tis he that 'neath thy arm must bow,
His haughty strength fast failing doth appear,
Hold to, my gallant boy!  thy victory is near."

He said, and all his words awake new rage.
As loud the blows from off the mail rebound,
As should two bulls, lords of the herd, engage,
And to their strife the plains from far resound.
Their strength alike, as yet, none yieldeth ground,
But so wise Harmond 'gan his son inspire,
That he to gain new might is ever found,
While doth the other fail in strength and ire.
And often, too, a step unwilling back retire.

This Harnol sees, and gathers all his srength,
And so it on the stranger knight he plied,
That reeling far, he senseless falls, at length,
Flat on his back, his arms extended wide:
As some high rock, that had the storm defied,
The thunder doth into the deep constrain:
The mariner no longer has his guide,
And throwing on the place his look in vain,
Much wonders what could carry thence a bulk so main.

So 'neath brave Harnol's strength the stranger fell&mdash;
"Hold," Harmond cries, "brave is the fallen knight,
Raise him, my son!  recover'd, he will tell
Why he did bear thee such undoubted spite."
He said, and Harnol would uplift him light,
But quick the stranger doth unaided rise,
As tho' again he would renew the fight,
But no, &mdash; to Harmond's son he eager flies,
And clasps him in his arms, and gives his soul to sighs.

"O wrong to bear thee hate, the knight doth cry,
All in thy pow'r, beneath thy arm I lay,
But thou would'st spare, &mdash; thy soul could not comply,
To do what should the fearful heart betray&mdash;
O, art thou from the land of Brydain, say!
Is it a knight, thence coming, thus could do?
Hate e'er for Brydain doth my bosom sway,
Her sons, in battle, late our knights o'erthrew,
And hence, sir knight, the hate that I did bear for you."

He says, and leads them to his dwelling fair;
But Dinah, who stood senseless in a shade,
Doth with them go, for long, she knows not where,
So much her trembling heart is still afraid;
But Harmond wise her fright has soon allayed,
And now they with the stranger pass the day,
Their haughty foe their dearest friend they've made,
And all to joy and friendly mirth give way,
That here, until refreshed, they do consent to stay.

And now the day is near already pass'd,
And still do all share in the merriment,
Alone doth Harmond hold his eyes down cast,
As tho' his thoughts are on the days long spent,
And oft his tender look around him went:
"Those walls," he cries, "how often have I seen!
How often hither have my steps been bent,
Since here my Bolden, faithful friend, has been!
O few are now who were as great as he, I ween!

"None, who have here since dwelt, my friend have known;
But here he dwelt when him I last did see;
O truest that could Erin land have shown!
At least I'll ne'er forget how true to me:
To Brydain's son you were no enemy;
When Bourdin with his haughty friends stood near,
You'd with me die, or set my Constah free,
We both were strong, our souls knew not of fear,
Ye sons of later days!  a tale of old come hear.

"'Tis night, and we are on the sea alone,
Bolden, Priden, and Harmond, son of song;
The moon at times our enemy has shown,
Before they are, in all their hundreds strong,
Winding their way to Erin land along:
We hear at times my Constah's mournful cry,
And follow to revenge the maiden's wrong;
With her, from Brydain, Bourdin late did fly,
While I was at the chase, and not a friend then nigh.

"The knight and I ere while did claim the maid,
And did her sire alike regard our claim;
Not so the fair, on me her hand she laid,
And blushing did the son of Brydain name;
Home to my land with her I joyful came:
And now a year had gone already by,
And soon the maid would give this son of fame,
When Bourdin did with her from Brydain fly,
While I was at the chase, and not a friend then nigh.

"Bolden the brave, a knight of Erin land,
O here it was that first our friendship grew!
With me doth take a spear and sword in hand,
The knight of his own country to pursue:
Priden, a knight of Brydain, follows too;
Great was his strength, to me he was allied;
After the foe his shouts tremendous flew,
And when my Constah shriek'd or them he spied,
His single arm alone the numerous throng defied.

"But sudden now the moon in heaven is lost,
And all the anger of the night doth rise;
Our slender bark upon the waves is tost,
Nor more the foe we see, nor bear the cries:
The thunder awful roars along the skies,
And all around us gloomy darkness be,
That nought we see but when the light'ning flies,
And then nought save a rock's declivity,
Or waves, wide opening near to swallow us, we see.

"Roll on, ye thunders of the night!  we cry,
And open wide to swallow us, ye waves,
Our guiltless hearts are not afraid to die;
None's here who of his right his friend bereaves;
'Tis he whom darkness from our vengeance saves,
'Tis he, who doth of bliss his friend deny,
That now, sure, trembling for his life oft craves,
He may not hear the thunders of the sky,
Nor, ocean, see thy tossing waves wide opening nigh.

"And cast us near the trembling foe, ye winds,
Let us, ere death, the injured maiden find,
For this now only sigh our fearless minds,
Be after, if ye will, cruel, unkind&mdash;
We have but ceased, when sudden calms the wind,
And the fell thunder its loud roar retains,
While fair the moon looks from her cloud behind,
And shows not far fair Erin land's high plains,
When, all at once, a bay our weary vessel gains;

"And soon on land, bright in our arms, we are,
And all is now as still as e'er was night:
A hill we see, high up in heavens afar,
And thither hie, to know if yet we might
Find upon land or sea the foe in sight;
But even while we go we deem it vain:
'They have, we cry, at length escap'd us quite,
And heaven t' assist the injur'd does not deign'&mdash;
'Tis so we speak, and now the hill afar do gain.

"But strange! &mdash; ere yet the hill ascend we do,
Sudden my Constah's mournful shriek all hear,
Toward the place at once our looks we threw,
And guessed right well the cruel foe were near.
Each knight, with fell intent, fast grasps his spear&mdash;
'O now!  my noble friends,' I cried, 'be brave&mdash;
But let us come in silence on, for fear,
The enemy us hearing, should them save,
Either by flight on land, or trusting to the wave.'

"I said, and 'gan myself to lead the way,
My friends themselves, close following, prepare,
And soon unfelt we came nigh where they lay&mdash;
It was within a valley here and there.
Some do a tent for Bourdin hasty rear;
My Constah stands all mournful by his side&mdash;
And ill can I my wrath a moment spare,
Howe'er my friends my eagerness do chide,
And first it is agreed to view them far and wide.

"And so we 'gan them far and wide to view,
And reckon all their forces o'er and o'er;
Bourdin among full twenty knights we knew,
And just hard by are near three hundred more;
Some on the mountain's side, some near the shore,
Where now at anchor safe their bark doth rest;
And every chief his arms fast by him bore,
Yet at the furling sails, or noise the least,
Each would him start, as he were much by fear oppress'd.

"All hope to win, howe'er, my soul doth leave,
But yet to fight Harmond cannot deny:
I turn to bid my friends by flight them save,
That one for Constah was enough to die&mdash;
But why say friends?  ah friends no more have I!
Alone doth Bolden with me now remain,
Priden, through fear, fast toward our bark doth fly,&mdash;
And now we see him as he doth it gain,
The moon shines on his mail, &mdash; he tugs across the main.

"'Curse on the coward!'  faithful Bolden cries&mdash;
'O!  he no hero brave, no loyal friend!
But here is one at least who with thee dies,'&mdash;
He said, and 'gan his spear at once extend
It straight among the enemy to send,&mdash;
But ere he could, his arm I sudden seize,
And cry, why will the noble Bolden end,
Afar from all, mid enemy his days?
Our arms against such force, though strong, no hope may raise.

"Then fly!  and leave me here to fall alone,
For I cannot but for my Constah fall;
The maid till death for me her love will own,
And future times may yet my fame recall&mdash;
This all I said, and thus he answers all:
'Am I,' he cries, 'then from you now to turn?
Canst thou observe, that fear doth me appal,
Or dost thou hear me like a woman mourn?
Know, Harmond, that my soul like yours for fame can burn.

"'And future times can too my fame recall,&mdash;
Nor may the maiden me so soon forget;
Then vain to tell that I 'mong foes shall fall,
That cannot, tender friend, this soul e'er fret;
Besides, why, Harmond, should I basely let
Be lost that name that I of thee acquire?
No, Bolden, be the friend of Harmond yet,
Thou never shalt, as Priden base, retire,
Shalt not, to save thy life, witness thy fame expire.'

"He ceased:  the tears are starting from my eyes,
And wilt thou fall with me, great friend, said I?
'O yes!  my Harmond,' he all loudly cries,
'We will together for the maiden die,'&mdash;
He said &mdash; the foe him heard, &mdash; but did not spy,
And great, no doubt, they thought our strength must be,
For ere our spears among them 'gan to fly,
Through terror great, away they, hasty flee,
Some toward the mountain tops, and some on towards the sea.

"By turns we shout, but keep us hidden still,
Till but ten knights with Bourdin now abide,
And they below, and we upon the hill,
Them viewing staring round both far and wide&mdash;
They towards us come &mdash; and we no longer hide,
But, all at once, our spears among them throw;
When straight a knight doth fall on either side,
Nor holdeth there, but swift does tumb'ling go
Headlong adown to where still Bourdin is below.

"Nor do we after rush, but calmly stop
Until their charge the eight remaining deign,
And then we crouch, and in the mountain top
Their lengthen'd spears are all deep sunk in vain,
When furious we do on them rush amain,
And ruin is &mdash; some dead, and some alive,
Are tumbled senseless to the vale again&mdash;
As when two mountain floods before them drive
Or rock, or oak, or what else might of way deprive.

"Thus fell, beneath our strength, tall Bourdin's men;
He too foresees his fall, and 'gins to fly,
But ere he's far a rock I seize, which then
Lay sunk in earth and aged moss hard by&mdash;
It angry went &mdash; it met his helmet high&mdash;
Nor yet he falls, but senseless looks around,
Until he gains the sea coast, then just nigh,
Where reeling oft, he tumbles to the ground,&mdash;
Loud rings the shore &mdash; his people fearful hear the sound.

"As when an oak upon the mountain's brow,
A cliff, high fallen from above, doth meet&mdash;
Beneath the shock it doth at first but bow,
Until at length, with all its heavy weight
Of mossy boughs, and trunk, and body great,
Rough tearing from its roots, it tumbleth down.
The oak, for all around, behold its fate,
And, loudly groaning forth, do trembling own
All pow'rful that which has such mighty force o'erthrown.

"So Bourdin fell, and all do with him yield,&mdash;
We shout for joy, &mdash; loud echoes all the sea&mdash;
Alone doth Constah rest upon the field,
And where she is we hasty bend our way,&mdash;
Thoughtless of ill, &mdash; but on the ground she lay,
With two fair babes, &mdash; to them she now gave birth&mdash;
I tender speak, &mdash; a word she cannot say,&mdash;
Her cheek is pale &mdash; her hand as cold as earth&mdash;
She's dead, I cry &mdash; adieu to all my days of mirth!

"Yes, she was dead, and we, the live long night,
Did mourn there all alone the blooming maid,&mdash;
But liv'd her babes; they wak'd with morning's light,
And oft to find her snowy breast essay'd:
My friend begs one, &mdash; Harnol to my breast I laid.
Then raise we Constah's tomb upon the strand,
And with his babe each to his home now made&mdash;
To Brydain I, and he to Erin-land,
Where tidings often since I did of him demand.

"But all demands since for the knight were vain;
It must that he 'neath Bourdin's people fell,
For they did promise much of gold and gain,
To him who should of noble Bolden tell&mdash;
Then, worthy friend, for ever now farewell!&mdash;
No hope for thee my soul can longer raise&mdash;
O that the friendship which with thee did dwell,
Could as impartial now each bosom seize!
But who can match the friend of Harmond's early days?"

The bard here ceas'd, and all go seek repose.
No more the sun is seen upon the hill,
But to his rosy couch now 'neath him goes,
Where he doth rest the live long night, until
Him in the morn Aurora waken will&mdash;
Nay all the world wide do go to rest,
Save Lucan, who, as late, is wandering still;
All day he travell'd has, nor ever ceas'd,
That now, through journey long, his steed is much oppress'd.

He doth not longer toward Killarney go,
For Dinah there, he knows, may not reside,
And where she is, he is resolved to know,
And hence that now he wanders far and wide.
But who is she fair riding by his side?&mdash;
'Tis Merah's self, who would her lord go find:
Nor can Sisserah from them more abide;
Love for their virtue now doth fill her mind,
And, as unworthy maid, she follows far behind.

A court at length they spy fair in a vale,
Which doth so throw its rays around it bright,
That all the little birds the radiance had,
As though it were Aurora's early light;
In haste doth thitherward repair the knight,
To know if 'neath a dome so wond'rous fair,
Refresh them of their journey long they might,
And now arriving, all do enter there,
Nor is there grudge, the hostess all doth welcome bear.

The spacious hall fair maidens all do fill,
And near each maid a knight himself doth place,
Who, if rich arms could show of force or skill,
Should Lucan far in all such worth efface;
But such cannot when what beneath is base:
Then, fool is he who all his praise can leave
For him who shineth most in gold or lace,
When worth alone it is that such can crave,
And lace may 'dorn as well the coward as the brave.

With heedless glance the maidens Lucan view;
Deep dinted are his arms from cruel war,
And perils great, which he has suffered too,
Since he did travel Erin-land afar:
And such, the maidens think, his worth ought mar,
And hence their glance all heedless on him ran;
Oh how deceived! &mdash; but ye alone not are,
The world like you, alas find many can,
Who, from habiliment, appreciate the man!

But beauteous maid should not be led astray,
'Tis not on him who shines but in parade,
That she her hope, her love, her soul should lay,
'Tis on the mind of worth it should be laid,&mdash;
On him who merits love of beauteous maid:&mdash;
But he of show, what doth his soul possess?&mdash;
But sure he hath no soul &mdash; he's but a shade&mdash;
One somehow got 'tween pride and selfishness,
In sooth, tho' human formed, a being of nothingness.

Now in the merriment long do they share,
Until, at length, the hour of rest is come,
When, all foreweari'd, they themselves repair,
In grateful sleep to find of quiet some.
The hostess takes Sisserah to a room,
'Tis far from where them any may o'erhear,
And there, as it doth hostess oft become,
She begs that all she knows she would declare,
As last whence did she come, and now how far, and where.

And doth Sisserah from the first all tell&mdash;
How she saw Lucan near the lonely tow'r,
And how she brought him where herself did dwell,
And all beside which happen'd since that hour
As how his greatness did her heart o'erpow'r,
And how he Merah from her foes did free,
And how her sire his gratitude did pour,
And tell the tale of Harnol's bravery,
And what else happen'd had, ere they her house did see.

Scarce has she heard, when she at once begins
To urge the maid to change her just design,
And ev'ry way she tries that ever wins
The upright soul from what is chaste, divine:&mdash;
"O if," she cries, "my soul were like to thine!
Narenna's soul! &mdash; alas, what should I do?
To be in sorrow, &mdash; ever to repine
For what? &mdash; for joy or bliss ere while gone through!&mdash;
O wretched life, in sooth, for thee, sad maid, I view.

"Then leave thy mad design, and with me dwell;
Nor sorrow, nor repining here will be,
But thou shalt all thy youth in pleasure tell,
Without one hour of woe to ever see,
All day in bow'rs, all night in revelry;
And still with fairest maids and knights of fame:
Yes, leave thy mad design, and dwell with me,
Loud at my breast, thy fate doth pity claim,
And whoe'er could not pity show were, sure, to blame."

She said, and thus Sisserah doth reply:
"O did Narenna, beauteous maiden, know
How lovely virtue is as now do I,
She would not pity then, but envy show!
O once my bosom too like thine did glow!
Once did I feel what now can thee entice,
But since another, soul did in me grow,
Sisserah since vain joys did sacrifice,&mdash;
And, Virtue, how thou'rt fair!  and how thou'rt hateful, Vice!"

Hasty, at this, Narenna from her went,
Ill could she bear to hear fair virtue's praise;
And now where Merah is her way she bent,
Nor, till that maiden fair she finds, delays&mdash;
Asleep she is &mdash; Narenna sudden stays&mdash;
"I will," she cries, "behold how she is fair"&mdash;
She throws a look &mdash; but quick, as in amaze,
That look withdraws, the sight she could not bear,
To her such pain to look on virtue's beauty rare.

"Ha!  that," she cries, "is beauty fair indeed!
How far can she my fairest maids efface!
Nor art, nor charms affected doth she need,
With her real beauty is, &mdash; 'tis Heaven's grace&mdash;
None such, alas!  can with Narenna trace;
Though once, as Merah, virtuous maid, had she
Such sweetness and such loveliness of face,
But long 'tis now since I that day did see,
Yes, long, O sin!  since first my soul did yield to thee.

"And, Merah, you that now so virtuous be,
May yet too know of sin as well as I,&mdash;
Yes, and you shall, thy virtue's ruin I see,
And yours, Sisserah, too &mdash; now all is nigh&mdash;
Jourdan and Bryardan do sleep close by,
And ye for them will be a rich reward,
When 'neath their secret blows your knight shall die&mdash;
If two will not soon vanquish one, 'tis hard;
And when he low, who, maidens, will thy virtue guard?"

She said, and envy doth her bosom sway,
That maiden should be than herself more great;
She goes where Hourdan and Bryardan lay,
Full jealous now of virtue's happy state;
Asleep them soon she found &mdash; but not as late,
Fair Merah, virtue's self, in sleep she found&mdash;
Pale horror on each visage held his seat,
And ever they with look forbidden frown'd,
And startl'd too, as though within did something wound.

"Ha!  there," she cries, "foul guilt, not virtue, sleeps&mdash;
Within them now they do some hellish deed,
And hence that gloom which on each visage keeps,
Full glad they will on what I want proceed"&mdash;
She said, and 'gan to waken them with speed:
They start, they look, &mdash; she doth to them declare
What she would of them have, and, that the meed
They might behold, now hasty leads them where,
Unconscious of all ill, asleep the maidens were.

With greedy look the knights do on them gaze,&mdash;
But swift Narenna forces them away&mdash;
And now their arms with fell intent they seize,
Resolving each a maid to have ere day&mdash;
They come at length to where brave Lucan lay:
"Approach," Narenna cries, "behold the guard
'Gainst all thy hopes, nought else frustrate them may,
Be valiant then, since great is the reward;
Sure two will vanquish one, or it is very hard!"

They both advance, their swords uplifted high&mdash;
Asleep he is, ere dead, they would him view,
And throw a look, but without knowing why,
That look, all hasty, fearful back 'gain drew&mdash;
'Twas that his brow, on which sat valour true,
Did strike with terror great each trembling heart&mdash;
And now they shake, and now they cannot do
What fain they would, that much does shame them smart,
And oft they in them cry, "O knight, how great thou art!"

Narenna sees their shame, &mdash; she doth them chide:
"Why do ye fearful look upon that brow?&mdash;
Where is that valour gone so quick?"  she cried,
"Which ye unasked, would ever tell of so?"
Cry they, "defenceless knight we know not how
To basely slay, &mdash; it is beneath brave man,"&mdash;
To which the maid, "Then will I wake him now,"&mdash;
She feigneth such &mdash; away they hasty ran,
And cry for mercy dear, and hide them where they can.

