BOOK THE FIRST.
Lo!  sable night ascends the dusky air,
And spreads her deep'ning shadows all around;
Her silent influence stills the noisy world,
And wakes the studious soul to solemn thought.
Wrapp'd in thy shades, companion of thy gloom,
O goddess waft me in thy cloudy wain
To all the lonely limits of thy rule;
While mortals dream the happy hours away,
And slight the awful pleasures of thy reign;
Wrapp'd in thy shades; What wonders will arise,
And thro' the deepest gloom delight my soul!

O thou, whose secret haunt is far remov'd
From all the restless, glaring scenes of day,
Sweet contemplation, daughter of the night!
O deign thy favour to th' adventrous muse,
And, on thy pow'rful pinions, safely guide
Her daring progress thro' the darksom round;
So shall my grateful songs resound thy praise,
With dulcet musick, and attune the hours
Of sleep, and silence with melodious lays.

When, from the steep of heav'n's aetherial arch,
The sun's red orb descending rolls the day,
All-shadowing night, dun-rising o'er the east,
Begins her silent course, and slowly drives
Her gloomy car along the dark'ning skies,
'Till, downward far beneath the earth's green verge,
The last retreating beams of light are fled:
Then, with a loosen'd rein, her rapid steeds
In hast ascend and all the landscape's lost
At once beneath her wide-extended veil:
Then half the mountains of the dreery globe,
Involv'd with shades, and black-brow'd darkness mourn,
In pond'rous clouds hang heavy on her wheels.
But if the northern blast has clear'd the air,
And wastful tempests slumber on the deep,
Bright Vesper leads her peaceful wain, and rolls
His radiant circlet up the starry vault,
Or, o'er th' illumin'd earth, the friendly moon
Streams down her grateful rays, and shines the queen of heav'n.

Mean while revolving time, with restless toil,
Thro' all the seasons turns the circling year,
And varies ev'ry scene with gradual change.
First youthful spring begins the wond'rous round,
With all the loves, and graces in his train,
And, rising glorious o'er the heav'nly blue,
Brightens the day, and, from his dewy wings
Distills soft pleasures on the blooming world;
Wakes the young flow'rs to chear the gladsome green,
And tunes the sylvan choirs to songs of joy:
Or, when still evening o'er the sky returns,
And, in their radiant orbs, the twinkling stars
Prepare their circuits, and exert their rays,
His kindly warmth exhales a thousand sweets,
And wafts the blended odours thro' the air;
Charm'd with the spicy gale grim darkness smiles,
And night enchanted loiters in the sky;
While brooding joys attend her sable throne,
And add unnumber'd beauties to her reign.

But various woes pollute all earthly bliss,
And rule the nations with alternate sway:
Lo!  while the infant bloom adorns the tree,
And early flowrets blossom in the meads,
The north wind, blustring thro' the midnight gloom,
The cold remains of winter drives along;
Down from the wastful cloud big hail descends,
And flats the flowry burthen of the fields:
The toiling peasant, as the morning dawns,
Eyes pensive all the languid scene, and mourns
The wide destruction of the wintry show'r.

Or, when the sun, all pale thro' watry clouds,
Descends, and faintly marks the length'ning shade,
Laden with deadly blights the eastern breeze
Moves slowly thro' the sky, and spreads it's bane
Resistless o'er the vegetable world;
The buds just opening wither in their prime,
The drooping blossoms shed their faded leaves,
And sickly flow'rs bent down before the blast,
Resign at once their odours, and their bloom;
The fruits, yet immature, drop from the stem,
And with abortive plenty strew the ground;
Or black'ning hang amid the blasted boughs,
As baleful trophies of the tainting gale.

At last, propitious Zephyr waves his wings,
And all the fragrance of the spring renews,
As nearer sun's returning shed their beams,
And drive far off the winter's rage away:
Then night arises big with vernal joys,
And veils the welkin with a grateful shade:
Then roseat dews, in thickest show'rs, unfelt
Refreshing fall, and, where the horned moon,
Slant o'er the green, low-circling, streams her light,
Impearl the flow'rs, and gleam from ev'ry leaf;
While wakeful Philomela pensive sings
Her soul-enchanting strains, and lonely chears
The darksom shadows with melodious lays.

Then (long disturb'd with roaring restless storms)
The ocean waves in gentle murmurs roll,
And Halcyon brooding on the peaceful deeps,
Rebuilds her floating nest and hails the blissful change;
Unwonted verdure greens the rocky strand,
And on it's threat'ning brow, stern horror frowns no more;
Glad Amphitrite, rising from her cave,
Resumes her chariot, and, aloft, sublime,
In triumph rides along the subject-seas,
And breathes the odour of the balmy gale;
Her finny coursers shake their flowing mains,
And neigh exulting o'er the froathy brine;
Around the nymphs, and tritons tune their shells,
And all the sea-beat shores resound their joys.
Again the seamen hoist their willing sails,
And court the favours of th' indulgent breeze,
Light o'er the waves the gladsom vessel steers,
And ev'ry eye with kindling rapture views,
Earth, seas, and air at once serenely smile.

Mean time, inflam'd with love, the virgin roams
Thro' the dead silence of the evening's gloom,
And treads the mazes of the winding grove
To find the lovely youth her soul adores:
Now, breathless, panting with her native fears,
She longs, and sickens for his lov'd approach;
Now dreadless roves anew, and, whisp'ring soft,
Invokes a thousand blessings on his name:
At last he comes, and in a burst of joy
The happy lovers join their long embrace;
While rising transports warm each throbbing heart,
And with a flood of pleasure rush thro' ev'ry vein:
Then, where embow'ring shades, ascending high,
With dewy woodbines knit their leafy boughs,
And nature wantons in abundant sweets,
They sit entranc'd beneath, and look, and sigh,
And murmur all the passion of their souls.
So, in the rage of mutual pleasures lost,
Their sprightly thoughts with gladsom prospects teem:
Thro' the dim shades aereal musick sounds,
And midnight Fairies, o'er the lightsom green,
In mazy circles seem to dance along,
'Till, from the gath'ring show'r, they vanish all away.

For, now wide hov'ring thro' the misty air,
Dark clouds ascend, and roll, and blacken all around.
Down pour the rains redundant o'er the globe,
And soak, and freshen all the thirsty fields;
The drooping herds forsake the smoaking heath,
And seek the shelt'ring wood, and mortals bless
The grateful show'r, which, beating on the roof,
With sleepy murmur lulls their drowsy souls.
At length the morning light illustrious dawns,
Sweetly acclaim'd with charm of earliest birds,
And throws a glory o'er the fragrant earth.

Thus where soft peace it's downy influence sheds,
When nature blooms, and all the world is gay;
Untainted pleasure in the darkness broods,
And lifts the soul to joy:  but where dread Mars
His bloody banner o'er a nation waves,
In vain fresh flowrets spring, and verdure crowns the woods:
Contending armies hide the flow'ry field,
And flaming forests in their verdure burn:
Wide-wasting slaughter rages all the day,
And crimsons deep the plains; and when black night
With rising terrors darkens o'er the world,
The clash of arms, and all the din of war,
In dreadful circles thro' the air resound.
The wretched parent, all aghast, deplores
His ravish'd daughters, and his murder'd sons,
And, on the noxious earth, with sleepless eyes
Weeps the sad hours surcharg'd with woe away;
While desolation saddens ev'ry scene,
And horror stalks tremendous o'er the waste.

The sons of rapine, bent on mischief, roam
The bloody field, and, striding o'er the dead,
Seize all the rich habiliments of war;
And if, yet warm with inward life, there breathes
Some hapless wretch among the heaps of slain,
The cruel sword, fatigu'd with death, expels
His suppliant soul, while, thro' the midnight air,
Long-sounding groans of injur'd ghosts are heard,
And dying murmurs mingle with the winds.

So where the barb'rous Russians scour the woods,
And hunt the frighted beasts in droves along;
Huge numbers fall, and yield their costly furrs
An easy prey:  the mangled carnage lies
A burthen to the earth, and hungry wolves,
Attending nightly on the slaught'ring tribe,
Yell hideous o'er the deathful scene, and fill
With shuddring horror all the neighb'ring lands.

O bear me far, my guardian angel, hence
From hostile nations, and from scenes of blood,
To those obscure, and solitary shades,
Which bold Columbus first explor'd; there lost
In peace, and silence my contented soul
May slumber life away remote from war,
Nor hear the crush when mighty empires fall,
And shake with pond'rous ruins half the world.
&mdash;There nature pours with lavish hand her sweets,
And in profusion ev'ry blessing gives;
When lively spring returns, fresh verdure greens
The thick'ning forests, and renews the shades:
Wide o'er the dusky lands they wave aloft,
And dance, and murmur to the wanton gale,
Which, fum'd with odours, (from the cheerful bloom
Of teeming trees in purple blossoms gay)
Wafts up a fragrant vapour to the stars:
Beneath with scented herbs, and opening flow'rs
The earth's embalm'd, while down the neighb'ring hills,
Soft murm'ring, roll a thousand gentle streams,
And lull the thoughtless savage to repose:
Charm'd with the various joy soft sleep descends,
And dewy slumbers on his eyelid sheds;
The silent god sinks easy on his breast,
And folds his drowsy limbs in midnight down.

But can the murmurs of descending floods,
And mingled fragrance of the blooming earth,
Or secret shades, and solitude relieve
The inborn sorrows, and perplexing cares
Which torture deep the miserable soul?
Alas!  in vain he courts the spicy gale,
The floating musick, or the lonely shade;
No pause of grief attends the rapt'rous scene,
But down he sinks oppress'd with cureless woe:
&mdash;Black melancholy glooms his mournful thought,
And gives a dreadful horror to the night:
All sad she rises o'er the pensive fields,
And with her dusky wing embrowns the dark'ning green;
Where e'er she turns contagion flies along,
And fades the honours of the blooming tree;
Infects the odours of the springing flow'rs,
And veils the beauty of the silken leaves;
Now plaintive down the headlong wave she glides,
And wakes lone echoe with the sadd'ning sound;
Now on the sighing breeze sublimely rides,
And murmurs solemn in the waving boughs;
Ascending thence the stygian vapour  shades
The twinkling glories of the heav'nly vault,
And all the planets of malignant rule,
Gleam on the midnight earth their baleful rays.


BOOK THE SECOND.
When thus the spring has introduc'd the year,
And bless'd with various beauties half the globe,
The sun, exalted to the midmost sky,
Flames on his rear, and burns his silken wings:
So panting in the heat he flies away,
And sultry summer rules the lazy air.

Then, faint with labour in the mid-day beam,
The sweaty peasant to the shade retires,
And, wishing down the sun, implores that night
Would throw her shadows o'er the scorching world,
Or invocates aloud the flagging gales
To mitigate the glowing heat:  in vain;
The flagging gales deny their freshening aid,
And tardy day yet lingers in the sky,
While frantick herds bound o'er the dusty plain,
And wade delighted down the cooling wave:
&mdash;'Tis then the fervour of the blazing sun
Exhales the moisture of the thirsty earth:
Then the brown herbage withers in the fields,
And various rifts divide the parching meads;
Scorch'd on the stem the languid roses fade,
And all the drooping forests hang their leaves;
'Till from the skies his burning orb descends:
When, wide-expanded in the ev'ning air,
The pearly dew-drops fall, and chear the flow'rs,
And all the verdure of the earth revive.

So, when, long wand'ring o'er the Arabian sands,
The gasping pilgrims search with fruitless toil
For limpid streams along the dreary waste;
Intestine drought, like darted light'ning, flies
Thro' ev'ry vein, and scorches all within;
'Till, at the bubbling springs at last arriv'd,
With frequent draughts they cool their raging heat,
And feel new vigor strength'ning ev'ry limb.

Now darkness o'er th' aethereal concave reigns,
And drives the twilight's dusky gleam away,
While, dim, the sapphire moon, full orb'd, ascends,
And wheels her chariot thro' the misty air,
'Till mounted high, she rides illustrious on,
And gilds remoter worlds:  the lightsom earth,
Illumin'd with her beams, in secret smiles,
And ev'ry mountain sheds a glory down;
The waving woods nod shadowy o'er the green,
And chrystal streams reflect her silver rays.

Goddess of shades!  soft regent of the night,
Whose friendly circuit weary wand'rers bless!
Queen of the watry world!  fair planet, tell
What happy tribes enjoy your argent fields?
Find virtue's sons their wish'd Elysium there,
And wander gladsome thro' your radiant walks?
Dwell infant souls, just wing'd for human life,
Among your od'rous shades, and thence descend
Thro' night's dark gloom to breath inclement air,
Mindless of native joys now their's no more?
Or, do our guardian angels ease their wings,
When freed from us, on your delightful plains,
And in the purer dews purge off the gloom,
And black'ning tincture of our earthly globe?
Or crown'd with ever blooming roses strike
The golden lyre, and warble heav'nly strains?
Or rais'd sublime bestride your purple clouds,
And fail serenely thro' the realms of light?
For sure a nobler race must there reside
With guilt untainted, like the sons of heav'n,
To reap the blessings of your happy orb.

Now silence reigns, and all the fervent air
Glows with the seasons warmth:  no cooling gale
It's airy pinions wide-refreshing waves;
But stifling vapours thicken in the sky,
And hang with saffron mists the dusky glebe.
The forests sound no more; the branches rest,
And flowing smooth rolls down the even flood:
While, o'er the earth's green verge, pale light'nings stream,
And flash their length'ning radiance to the stars.

At last soft whisp'ring Zephyr shakes his wings,
And sheds ambrosial odours o'er the world:
Then bow the woods before his balmy breath,
And, gently rising, dance the azure waves;
While, tir'd with daily toils, and longsom hours,
The weary lab'rer lies in downy slumbers lost;
And all the sylvan choirs, their lays forgot,
In silence sleep among the pendent boughs.

Mean time the frolick virgins hast along
Thro' lonely shades, and unfrequented fields,
To bath their naked beauties in the stream:
In loose array they wander on the brink,
And ston, and listen to the trembling leaves,
Afraid some bold intruder lurks beneath:
Then shiv'ring touch the margin of the flood
With tim'rous foot and sound the shallow ford;
'Till, sportive grown, they beat the buxom waves,
And drive continual circles to the shore.

At length, wide-floating on the midnight breeze
They hear soft musick tune the vocal air,
And sounds of mirth each melting strain succeed.
Frighted!  amaz'd!  they hurry to the land,
And glide immediate thro' the darksom shade:
From far the joyous consort fills the gloom,
But dies at last in less'ning notes away,
As down the murm'ring tide the mirthful bark
Floats gently, and transporting pleasure broods
On the wide surface of the watry plain.

Now, while the moon in her meridian rides,
And streams her brightest glories o'er the earth,
Let me beneath embow'ring shadows lye,
Where eglantines, and starry jess'mines waft
Their mingled fragrance; where sweet lilies bloom,
And blushing roses all their odours shed:
There, silent as the night, my studious soul
Shall scorn the earth, and wing her thoughts to heav'n,
Shall, with unwearied flight, high-soaring trace
The shining path, which slighted virtue takes,
To the bright mansions of eternal joy.
&mdash;Lo!  the pure azure parts, and from the skies,
In streams of light, an heav'nly form descends,
And leans illustrious on the purple cloud.
'Tis she!  meek patience, by whose potent lore
The noble soul in all it's sorrow smiles:
&mdash;I feel her influence easing ev'ry care,
And ev'ry passion soothing into peace:
So rais'd superior to the earth's dark globe,
It's pleasures charm no more, and all it's pains are lost.

Arise, my friend, my dearest Nisus, rise;
And, while the world's a solitude, and night
Hangs her dark mantle o'er the shaded skies,
Come, let us roam along the moon-light fields,
And, in soft converse, spend the silent hours.
What a still coolness freshens in the wind!
How sweet the vales!  how beautifully the hills!
How deep the murmurs!  and how bright the stream!

O happy land where peace for ever dwells,
And freedom roves among the cheerful tribes;
Where nature riots in luxuriant joys,
And ev'ry cloud drops down mellifluent dews;
Where rosy health sweetens the wholsom air,
And drives the taint of pestilence away;
While Graecia, (once Minerva's darling seat,
From whence the goddess civliz'd the world)
By frequent plagues depopulated, mourns
Her vacant cities, and deserted plains.
&mdash;Drove from the southern climes, and big with fate,
They load the murm'ring gale, and dim the day
With mortal vapours, and infectious blasts.
Dark night succeeds involv'd with deadly mists,
And swell'd with venom baneful dews descend;
The grazing heifer of lamentable groans expires;
While round the gasping father mourn the sons
Struck with the dire disease they sudden fall,
And in the rage of agonizing tortures dye.
Thus death prevails, and, glorying in the waste
Shakes from on high his formidable dart,
And stalks gigantick o'er the dreary realms:
Trembling the earth beneath his footstep groans
And all its mountains shake:  the glutted grave
No longer opens her destructive jaws;
But choak'd with heaps of dead can hold no more.
So on the blasted heath whole tribes are hurl'd,
And rot, and moulder in the tainted wind.

Midst all the glories of the Orient climes,
With rig'rous hand oppressive slav'ry reigns,
And claims the rev'rence of an earthly god:
High on a pompous throne, with glitt'ring gems
Emblaz'd, the lordly tyrant sits sublime,
Array'd in purple, and adorn'd with gold,
And awes the nations with majestick frown:
In crouds they tremble at the dreadful nod,
And prostrate in the dust adorning fall:
When &mdash; hark!  their idol thunders from above,
And hecatombs of human victims bleed,
To make a short atonement for his causeless rage.

In Africk's wide, inhospitable lands,
Beneath the torrid Zone, what burning suns
Inflame the earth, and scorch the sultry air!
What latent deaths, Medusa's direful brood,
Lurk in the desart plains, and shoot their strings,
And kill with tortures not to be describ'd!
If from the ocean cooling gales arise,
When shadowy night comes on, and gently clears
The hot effluvia from the glowing sky;
E'er half her course is finish'd o'er the world,
The sickly south collects his strongest blast,
And drives a tempest thro' the clouded heav'ns;
Involv'd with deepest darkness raves along,
And bears th' Almighty on his gloomy wings
Prepar'd for vegeance, and inflam'd with rage:
Dreadfully great applause th' indignant god
Sublimely riding on the wastful storm;
Commanding forth the daemons of the night
To pour his anger o'er the sinful globe;
Arming his red right hand with vengeful bolts,
And hurling ruin thro' the fearful void:
Then flame the woods, then smoke the mountain tops,
And earth affrighted to the centre shakes;
The guilty nations tremble at the roar,
And in deep caverns shun the deathful blaze:
The lordly lion, howling thro' the dark,
In terrour flies from his untasted prey,
And all the monsters of the sandy waste
Yell in the storm, and hasten to their dens.

Far, far from hence, amidst th' Atlantick waves,
A length of islands stretch their rocky shores,
And check the fury of the raging surge,
Where golden fruitage bends the fragrant boughs,
And od'rous blossoms waft eternal sweets;
Where blooms the citron, and the fruitful pine
It's honey-tasted apples plenteous yields;
Where luscious harvests chear the planters toil,
And various spices scent the gladsom gale.

There, when the flaming sun has fir'd the air,
And evening glows with unabated warmth,
Calm on the deep the ocean breezes rest,
And thro' the welkin scatter joys no more:
Dim vapours rising choak the starry heav'ns,
And all the brute creation scarcely breath;
Then luckless men inflam'd with parching thirst,
And the dire fervour of the flagrant heat,
On the damp ground incumbent seek for ease,
And drain the brimming bowl with frequent draughts;
Whence dizzy fumes the giddy brain disturb,
And heavy slumbers weigh their eyelids down;
Mean time the dew surcharg'd with fate descends,
And spreads a deathful cold thro' ev'ry limb;
Slow beats the heart, and all the pulses dye:
At last the fleeting soul reluctant leaves
The stiff'ning corse, and wonders at her change;
While, with the dawning day, their mourning friends
Lament the careless hour too negligent of life.

Nor these alone betray'd by fatal joys
Anticipate their end; but where like heats
Beneath the burning line perpetual reign,
The panting seamen, thoughtless of their face,
Trust the smooth surface of the flatt'ring main,
And swim with transport o'er it's smiling face;
While, left at large, with all her sails unfurl'd,
Th' abandon'd vessel unregarded floats:
When lo!  fresh blasts arising swell the waves,
And briskly drive the hoary surge along:
Swift flies the bark before the wanton breeze,
And marks with bubbling froth her watry road:
Struck, at the dismal sight, with wild amaze,
The careless wand'rers struggle in the deeps,
And vainly toil to reach her friendly side;
'Till tir'd, and fainting with the long fatigue,
They down the ruffled brine despairing sink,
And in the sad reflection of their folly die.

But see!  the morning star leads on the day,
And golden clouds adorn the radiant east.
Far from the light, and man's deceitful race,
My friends retire, since thy sincerer soul
Can ne'er descend to varnish o'er their crimes,
Or stain thy spotless life with fashionable guilt.


BOOK THE THIRD.
Now the red dog-star, flaming from the south,
Rolls off his sultry rays, and frees the air
From raging fevers, and unwholsom heat.
Autumn ascends the sky, and weighs the year
In even scale:  plenty directs her car,
And empties all her blessings on the earth,
While equal days, and nights, advancing mild,
Wave their light pinions o'er the world by turns.

High on a verd'rous hill, the blissful haunt
Of gladsom satyrs, and of woodland nymphs,
A ruin'd castle stands, great Chaucer's seat!
Where, ages since, the venerable bard
Rehears'd his songs, and charm'd th' attentive woods;
Where all the muses, at his pow'rful call,
Descended frequent on the midnight green,
And with melodious musick chear'd the shades.
&mdash;But home-bred in after-times disturb'd
The frighted mansion, and beneath it's walls
Whole armies rush'd, to battle on the plain,
And dy'd the neigh'bring streams with kind'red blood;
On the strong ramparts loud destruction roar'd
With ceaseless fury; whence the goodly frame
Disjointed fell in dust, and smoak obscur'd,
And but one tow'r of all the pile remains.

&mdash;Yet still, when night involves the sable skies,
The builder's awful ghost descends, and sings
Enchanting numbers on the ruin'd base,
While lonely echo, in her nightly cell
Rejoycing, doubles the celestial strain;
And the faint trav'ller, list'ning from afar,
Forgets his woes, and gives his soul to joy.
All nature's charm'd, and, in their radiant spheres
The planets dance to the harmonious lay.

When day declines, fond of the muses haunt,
And tir'd with all the various cares of life,
I tread the rising green; and, while the sun,
Red, from the western skies, projects his rays,
Survey delighted all the vales below,
Where golden Ceres waves the bearded grain,
And lab'ring peasants cut the harvest down;
Where, as still evening shadows o'er the heav'ns,
And nights dark wing embrowns the russet field,
The tinkling teams draw home the grateful load,
And jocund swains surrounding blithely chaunt
Their rustick songs, and sound their mirth aloud;
While pearly dews descending damp the ground,
And hang with liquid gems the trembling leaves.

Pleas'd with the prospect of a publick good
Soft raptures swell my soul, nor envy's sting
Can give me torture for a moment's space:
Tho' all but me with secret joy beheld
Their gather'd harvest, and the gain their own.

Give me, indulgent fortune, give me health,
A blest retirement in a small estate;
And let my Nisus chear the fleeting hours:
'Tis all I ask, 'tis all my soul can want.

Hail native land!  thus favour'd from above
With ev'ry blessing human kind can know,
Where fruitful harvests ripen ev'ry year,
And sunny fruits bend down the parent tree;
Where, undisturb'd with war's destructive rage,
The smiling farmer heaps th' autumnal wealth,
And eyes with rapt'rous thought the plenteous store,
Secure from rapine, and the waste of arms,
And all the proud demands of arbitrary rule.

Again the night rides thro' the dusky air,
And all the business of the day is done:
The reeking ox, and panting steed, releas'd
From labour, take their due repose; till morn
Ascends irradiate, and renews their toil.

Mean time the cheerful rusticks fill the bowl,
And quaff a short oblivion of their cares;
The merry bagpipe sounds a mirthful tune,
And all the tribe, in awkward dancing join'd,
With jocund heel, fast thump the hollow ground.
At length the rural banquet crowns the board;
The musick ceases, and the dances end,
The friendly band surrounds the social meal,
And takes a sweet repaste; then drouzy part,
And in soft slumbers wast the careless hours.

Nor Albion's fertile glebe can only boast
An o'er-abounding crop of golden grain;
For, round huge Aetna's ever-bursting height,
Returning harvest's burthen all the plains,
And wave luxuriant to the buxome gale.
But haply there, while midnight glooms the world,
And ev'ry weary soul is lost in sleep,
Loud, inbred thunder thro' the mountain rolls,
And to the centre all the island shakes;
Sulphureous flames involv'd with cloudy smoak,
Ascending furious, redden o'er the skies,
And cast a horrid splendour on the deep.
Rouz'd with the dreadful sound the nations start
From thoughtless slumbers, and aghast survey
The rising horrors of the flaming hill:
When lo!  wide-bursting from the gulph above,
A fiery deluge, charg'd with molten rocks,
Descends amain, and, with an hideous roar
Swift-rolling, drives a thousand woes along:
A thousand torrents rush resistless down,
And root the forests from the blasted earth;
The ripen'd harvest crackles in the blaze,
And all the ruin'd towns, in floods of fire,
Rent from their deep foundations burn:  at last
Collected in a mighty stream, it falls
With headlong fury down the rocky shore,
And flames, and hisses in the deeps below;
The waters boil, and all the frighted waves
In foaming circles hurry o'er the main.
Huge clouds of smoak in dusky wreaths ascend,
And roll their black'ning volumes to the stars;
While ghastly peasants, spoil'd of all their wealth,
From far lament the miserable waste.

So when, descending from the wrathful skies,
The rage of heav'n in fiery tempests fell,
And Sodom sunk beneath the vengful blaze,
The Patriarch, early as the morning light,
Beheld the horrors of the deathful scene,
And mourn'd the dire effects of unrepented guilt.

Now sable midnight shades the peaceful globe,
And o'er the spacious skies the vivid stars
Serenely shoot their rays; the dying gale
Pants in the with'ring trees, and down the fruit
Falls ripen'd to the ground:  the sleepy rills
Roll easy o'er the sands their silver waves,
And murmur now no more:  silence ascends
With downy pinions thro' the drouzy air,
And on the ocean's brim hang all the lazy clouds.
&mdash;Wide, o'er th' illumin'd north, pale splendours rise
In fiery columns  streaming to the stars;
And flash, and wave o'er all th' aetherial blue.
The lightsom earth, again unveils her charms,
As when the moon's increasing orb ascends,
And looks enliven'd  in the transient dawn;
The level waters, brighten'd, from afar
Reflect the glories of the shining vault,
And grace the landscape with their borrow'd rays:
While the lone wizard, in his secret cell,
Divines the blaze portentous to the world,
And shakes with horror at the harmless flame.

Now, from his dark abode, the god of dreams
Fantastick Morpheus!  with his various train
Of empty joys, and airy woes ascends,
And roams at pleasure o'er the silent world;
Here lurks beneath th' embroider'd tyrian bed
In treasons form, and frights the monarch's soul;
Or, circled round with dreadful faces, storms
The trembling gate, and drives th' attendant deaths,
In vollied thunder, on the sleeping guard.
&mdash;There far from courts, amidst the humble tribes,
Of lowly mortals sunk in deep repose,
He paints illusive scenes of fancied joy,
And gives a loose of pleasure to the sportive brain:
The dying lover dreams of golden hopes,
And strains his charmer in a vain embrace;
The friendless wretch beholds, with ravish'd eyes,
The grateful prospect of imagin'd wealth;
And the poor slave, that's wedded to his oar,
Wanders at large thro' all his realms of bliss.

O thou the only friend the luckless know,
Propitious god of visionary minds!
O let thy kindly influence bless my nights,
And with the happiest dreams delight my slumb'ring hours;
For, while the fleeting phantoms breath their charms,
All sullen sorrows quit their gloomy reign,
And swelling raptures gladden ev'ry thought;
Then, with a speedy wing, we swiftly soar,
From pole, to pole, and traverse ev'ry clime;
In ev'ry clime the varying prospects change,
And all the wonders of the gladsom globe,
In gay succession, chear the wand'ring soul.

Sometimes the guardian pow'rs of virtue's sons,
Array'd in all the glories of the sky,
Descend indulgent to their earthly charge,
And drive the horrors of the night away;
Tune to immortal songs their golden lyres,
And sooth the woes of life with heav'n's eternal joys.

Mean time, slow-rolling o'er the wat'ry meads,
The gath'ring mist extends it's noxious damp,
And dims the welkin with a blewish shade;
Then vagrant fires, from the moist earth exhal'd,
Faint-glimm'ring shoot a far-deceiving light,
On which attendant daemons nightly wait,
And smile at mischief in the dancing blaze;
For, gently wafted o'er the wondring green,
The tempting vapours smoothly glide along,
And, with uncertain glimpse, the wand'rer lead
Thro' pathless fields,  and thorny breaks astray;
While, sore fatigu'd, he groans beneath the toil,
And, sporting with his pain, the wily fiend
Glares thro' the lambent flame, and daunts his frighted soul.

&mdash;But hark!  the stormy south begins to blow,
And sweeps tempestuous o'er the sounding grove:
The branches bend, and all the shaken leaves
Thick-show'ring fall, and shade the dimply stream:
Down from the wat'ry clouds the rains descend,
And beat, and murmur to the hollow blast:
Deep darkness glooms the sky, and half the globe,
Involv'd with night, and horror, mourns below.
At length the tempest, gath'ring all it's force,
Bursts from on high with a tremendous roar,
And, raving dreadful o'er the frighted world,
An huge, wide-wasting ruin spreads around:
Torn in the whirl, and twisted from it's roots,
The knotted oak is hurried through the air,
And, downwards hurl'd with a resistless strength
The pond'rous buildings fall; trembles the earth
Beneath the horrid shock, and hills, and dales,
From far resounding, echo to the noise.

The ocean, rouz'd, and whiten'd o'er with foam,
It's wrathful billows furious rolls along,
And, loud as thunder bursting from the clouds
Beats on the rugged shore with ceaseless rage,
And boils, and sparkles in the broken wave.

Now, all forlorn, the hapless seamen wail
Their wayward fate; the boist'rous tempest tears
Their useless sails, and breaks the stubborn masts,
And all the horrors of the deep ascend.
Long tortur'd with the raging pangs of thirst,
And all the woes of life-consuming want,
They reel, and stagger in the blust'ring gale;
Or tumbling headlong dash the frothy brine,
And spread abroad their suppliant hands in vain,
The starving few, which yet remain alive,
With hunger fainting, and fatigu'd with toil,
All hopeless, heartless with surrounding woes,
Resign the vessel to the waves, and winds,
And wait the fury of the wasteful storm.

Mean time no prospect dawns of future joy,
But dire despair presents a dismal scene
Of endless wants, and aggravated woes.
All black she rises on their pensive souls,
And throws a mournful sadness o'er the night,
Now prompts th' impatient wretch to wish that fate
Would end at once his sorrows, and his life:
Then back returns the melancholy thought
Of former bliss, and pleasures now no more,
The waving harvest, and the plenteous meal,
Or Gallia's vintage, and the purple grape,
Bursting with fragrant juice, in vain describes;
And chrystal waters, gently murm'ring, pours
Before the thirsty soul:  so death ascends
With heighten'd horrors thro' the troubled air,
And rides triumphant o'er the roaring surge;
While day-light, slowly breaking thro' the gloom,
Purples the clouds, and dawns upon the deep.


BOOK THE FOURTH.
Now, stripp'd of all it's verd'rous pride, the year
Slowly decays, while, on the northern blast,
Bleak horrors rise, and all deform the world.
No more soft pleasure smooths the nights dark brow,
And chears the wakeful soul; no spicy gales
Breath fragrant odours o'er the flow'ry field,
And murmur musick thro' the waving grove:
No lonely Philomela tunes her voice,
And sings melodious in the secret shade:
No more the lovers seek their gladsome walks,
But look, and shudder at the varied scene;
For, all around, sad winter chills the air,
And hills, and plains present one dreary wast.

Now from the wat'ry vale gray mists ascend,
And roll, and thicken to the neighb'ring skies;
Amid the foggy cloud the stars are lost,
The prospects vanish, and a formless blank,
Wide-spreading, veils the whole creation round:
The wand'ring wretch, uncertain of his road,
In terrour walks, and, all his caution vain,
With sudden ruin sinks affrighted down,
And in the silent water dies:  then boist'rous gales
Burst from their latent caves, and clear the air,
Before the storm the length'ning vapour flies,
And all the roughen'd currents fiercely rave.
But e'er the midnight's gloom it's rage declines,
And all the waves are still:  when freezing fast
The harden'd earth is crusted o'er with ice,
And fetter'd ev'ry stream, while hoary frosts,
Descending, silver o'er the dusky green,
And cloath with gelid down the nodding trees,
'Till the broad sun ascends the wint'ry sky,
And by degrees dissolves the frozen dew.

Again the night returns, and eastern winds,
Deep-sounding, roll the pond'rous clouds along,
And furious drive an intermingled show'r
Of hail, and snow, and rain tempestuous down;
Freezing it falls, and, from the stiffen'd boughs,
In icy drops, and pendent chrystal, hangs.
The earth's dark realms are glaz'd, and hills, and plains,
Beneath the driving mist, are wholly lost.
Then, all o'er labour'd on some craggy height
Projecting dreadful o'er the raging deep,
The darksom pilgrim clings to ev'ry shrub,
And hears amaz'd the billows break below
With ceaseless fury on it's trembling base:
At length up-torn, before the vengeful blast,
The rock's rough brow gives way, and, fractur'd wide,
With huge destruction tumbles from on high,
And plunges fiercely in the foaming brine;
Crush'd in the fall the luckless wretch expires,
And on his mangled limbs the scaly monsters feed.

Mean time, loud-roaring from the heights above,
The gushing torrents force their downward way,
And in a gen'ral deluge drive along;
Now with a circling sweep in eddies foam,
And wheel, and bellow by the rocky shores;
Then, madly furious, o'er the bending cliff,
With all their mingled load of floating trees,
And ruin'd cotts, precipitate their rage,
And, in a burst of muddy waters, plunge
Amid the whirlings of the giddy waves.

Thus where, athwart a ridge of broken rocks,
The rapid, sea-wide Niagara falls,
With head-long haste it hurries down the steep,
As from a mountain's brow, and, raving loud,
For ever thunders in the depths below;
A rising mist hangs o'er the frothy gulph,
And horrid whirlpools rage along the shore,
All white with boiling foam for many a league.

Now all the burthen'd clouds their fleecy load
Discharge; the forest bends beneath the weight,
And all the plains in rising drifts are lost:
The whit'ning hills gleam faintly to the skies,
And, floating silent thro' the lightsom meads,
The widening torrent slowly rolls along.
Eas'd of their fright at last the dusky clouds
Unveil the heav'ns, and free the lab'ring air:
The waning moon appears with feeble ray,
And o'er the wint'ry wast remotely shines.
This is the time for such whose active souls
Explore the twinkling glories of the sky;
This is the time for such t' ascend in thought,
And travel o'er the vast immense; to chase
The swiftest meteors with an equal wing,
And measure out the comet's vengeful blaze;
T' examine all the wand'ring stars that roll
Around the sun, the fountain of their beams!
To ken ev'n their attendant orbs, and watch
Their various motions, and their changing rays;
To sail thro' seas of fluid light, and search
The crouded splendours of the milky way;
To tow'r upwards, and be lost amid
New stars, and suns, and worlds, as yet unknown,
That fill the boundless space, and prove the pow'r
Of an Almighty hand, thro' all the heav'nly frame:
For then serenely pure the air's refin'd,
And gives the smallest spark it's turn to shine;
Then, doubly fulgent, all the starry globes
Exert their radiance o'er the heav'nly blue,
And all the wide expansion flames with light.

But, where the huge metropolis extends
Her cloudy skirts, and restless mortals toil
For wealth, and honour, be my wish'd abode,
Far from the snowy field, the icy flood,
And all the rigour of the blust'ring winds:
There let me think o'er all the scenes of life,
And learn mankind; or, when dark night ascends,
And wreaths black vapours round th' aereal spires,
Alone, retir'd from all the busy world,
Let me attend the melancholy sound
Of fun'ral bells, and view the pomp of death
Slow-moving onward to th' expecting grave:
That, when the tyrant bends his dreadful bow,
And threat'ning aims at me his mortal dart,
I undisturb'd may bow submissive down,
And bless the friendly stroke: &mdash; but frail mankind
Would vainly boast to stand his dreaded pow'r,
Serene, or, with untrembling heart, survey
The aweful prospect of retreating life.
For, while the soul's imprison'd here below,
And shares the frailties of this earthly mould,
Her firmest thought with ev'ry trifle veers,
And all her reas'nings turn to ev'ry gale:
Fond of content we range the worldly maze,
And court the gay delights of ev'ry scene;
Yet own the goddess flies the eager chace,
Nor deigns to fix at the imagin'd goal:
Now, charm'd with rural joys, she seems to roam
In lonely shades, and all concealing night,
But, e'er the vain pursuers can arrive,
She waves her wanton wings, and fleets away:
Thence thro' the hurry of the world, she roves
And gilds with transient glance the tempting scene;
In vain we follow still the flying good,
And wish, and struggle to possess her charms;
'Till, too sublime, the fair deceiver soars,
And in the clouds is ever, ever lost.

Now horrid night arising shadowy glooms
The northern skies, and, o'er sad Greenland's coast
For half the year, continual darkness spreads:
No friendly dawn the dreary landscape knows,
Nor print of human feet, but sable clouds,
In black-brow'd volumes, hang for ever round;
And beasts of rapine, with incessant yell,
Haunt the dread circuit of the hideous void.

Mean time dire winter rules the frozen air,
And rides in whirlwinds thro' the low'ring day,
From the bleak hills sweeps off the drifted snows,
And drives his horrors o'er the wastful plain:
Then adverse gales embroil the surging waves,
And all the mountains of chrystalline ice,
(The mighty labour of unnumbered years!)
To furious combat rush, and crack, and rage
Amid the boiling deep:  huge ruins fall,
As with an earthquake shatter'd from on high,
And, loudly thund'ring down the rugged steep,
Crush with enormous weight the rocks below:
Th' afflicted shores resound, the ocean raves,
And all it's monsters tremble at the roar:
Ev'n whales, immensely huge, like cluster'd isles
Float from the din, and, with enormous gate
Wall'wing unwieldy, stem the wrathful surge,
And doubly tempest the outrageous main;
Press'd with their monst'rous bulk it groans beneath,
And vainly struggles with th' o'erwhelming load;
While to the clouds they spout the whiten'd wave,
And sink the ebbing waters from their shore.

Hence, e'er the sun fulfils his latest rounds,
And wheels his circles on the earth's cold verge,
The gladsom ships depart to warmer climes;
While, lone, forsaken on the desart strand,
Some hapless seaman views with eyes aghast,
And stupid horror all the less'ning sails;
'Till gone, for ever gone, the happy fleet
Ploughs o'er remoter waves:  then, all forlorn,
And frantick with despair, he beats his breast,
And vainly mourns his miserable fate,
As down the skies, the day-light hastes amain,
And long, long night, and rig'rous colds succeed.
At last dire hunger, and the chilling blast
Sink the sad wand'rer on the snowy ground,
And e'er kind death can seal his closing eyes,
The bears, and wolves (an horrid train!) descend,
And join fierce battles o'er the prostrate wretch,
And rend, and tear his crackling limbs by turns:
'Till the sad soul, affrighted flies away,
And scatter'd on the wast his bones remain
A dreadful prospect to returning fleets.

Now view the Baltick main oppress'd with heaps
Of thick-ribb'd ice, and chain'd, from shore, to shore,
Beneath the pond'rous load &mdash;  Hark!  from below,
Th' indignant billows murmur for release,
And heave, and labour with the weight in vain:
&mdash;But lo!  the night ascends, and southern gales,
All gloomy, drive the misty rains along,
And by degrees dissolve the mighty frame;
Thro' the dun air behold yon dreadless Swedes
In hast returning, laden with the spoils
Of wasted realms, along the dang'rous wild;
Unhappy men!  How fruitless all their toil
And plunder prove?  their footing melts amain,
And, e'er they can approach the cloudy coast,
The massy ruins, broken all around,
Like thunder echo'd in a thousand hills,
Burst from the shore, and, with a dreadful crash,
Divide the rocky fragments o'er the foaming waves;
The foaming waves, exulting, and at large,
Rave with mad fury round the floating isles,
And drive them fiercely to the trembling shores;
Loud sounds the shock, and all the neighb'ring lands,
Astonish'd, to their deep foundations shake:
While, struck with horror at the amazing scene,
The frighted wretches sink despairing down,
And in the vast, the loud confusion dye.

Mean time the sons of grandeur crown the bowl,
And laugh, and frolick 'till the morning's dawn;
Or, in th' expansive feast, and frolick dance,
Enjoy the smiling hours:  then wrapp'd in down,
Sleep the cold length of tardy night away,
Nor dream the sorrows which the luckless feel,
Dark-roaming thro' the melancholy gloom,
And beg a shelter from the blast in vain;
With harden'd hearts the living bar their doors,
And all relief deny:  the silent dead
Are only kind; so in the dreary vault,
On heaps of mould'ring bones, they seek repose,
And bless the friendly shade.  Ye heav'nly pow'rs,
If riches e'er must gild my future days,
And thirst of more should with my wealth increase;
Far, far away the baneful gift remove;
For, when the man who brooded o'er his gold,
And idoliz'd the heap, or, he whose soul,
Intent on sensual joy, refus'd to give
The smallest bounty to the wretch in want;
When such with dire diseases wast away,
And death approaching stares 'em in the face;
What pangs!  what tortures rack the lab'ring mind,
And shoot their horrors cold thro' ev'ry limb!
To them the night presents a dismal shade,
And guilt, and fear prolong the lazy hours;
Then rising specters with a dreadful glare,
Tremendous stalk amidst the redd'ning gloom,
And furious toss their burning brands on high;
Or, round the restless couch, (a ghastly throng!)
Yell hideous, and with icy hand prepare
To bind the sinner in eternal chains;
While owls obscene, portentous scream aloud,
And ev'ry gale, and ev'ry midnight sound,
Rings awful as the horrid call of death.
So, e'er the morning light, despairing heav'n,
And laden with her crimes the soul departs,
And waiting daemons seize the guilty freight,
And howl exulting thro' the dusky air.

But he who groans beneath the rage of fate,
Perplex'd with want, and stung with daily woes;
Yet freely proffers, with a lib'ral hand,
To wretched lazars suitable relief,
And spends in friendly offices his days;
If he, (mean tenant of an humble roof,
Low-seated on a rapid river's brink,
When tardy winter shakes his frozen wings
Prepar'd to journy thro' the skies away,
And blust'rous night hangs horrid in the clouds:)
If he attentive hears the rains descend,
And the rough torrent, charg'd with roaring ice,
Down-rushing furious to the ocean wave;
If the loud winds blow stormy round his head,
And the huge billows, bursting o'er their banks,
Deluge the meads with one resistless flood,
And sweep his dwelling in their rage away:
Serenely firm, in all that whirl of death,
His constant soul without a murmur leaves
The sinking corse, and tow'rs aloft to heav'n.
