Thou'st travell'd now, bright moon, across the sky,
Hast quit thy own high tower in heavens above,
Whence all the night thou didst sad Dinah spy,
And view the fight when aged Harmond strove.
As tho' to hear what did the maiden prove,
What woes to bear, hard fate did her compel,
Now dost thou lowly in the heavens move;
Harnol, the brave, requests the maid to tell,
Then hear, who will, all what, ere now, to her befell.

"'How fair, Killarney, are thy groves and bow'rs!
How fair, the summit of thy ancient hills!
Nor yet, less fair thy lovely fields of flow'rs,
Nor yet, less fair thy lovely streams and rills;
However, to look on thee, Killarney, fills
Sad Dinah's breast with nought but heavy care;
No more, to range the grove, her fancy wills,
No more, the lovely fields of flowers so fair,
For such recall the day ere Dinah knew despair.

"'The wars are o'er, and Lucan's absent still;
O great the cause!  alas, I fear to be!
For he did say, save death or heavy ill,
Nought could, Sir Knight, withhold him long from me;
Then, lovely vale, how can I look on thee!
For all thy loveliness doth but recall
The day when thou didst Lucan with me see;
And when that heavy thought, 'tis sadness all&mdash;
Then think I on what too did Erin land befall.

"''Tis on thy ruin, I think, Erin land!
Behold it! &mdash; all my boding soul doth see&mdash;
There stalks pale desolation 'long thy strand,
There bend thy generous sons to slavery,&mdash;
And ev'ry eye with tears doth look on thee;
(And where the breast which might such scene withstand?)
Even the brave amid the enemy,
Refuse to rear 'gainst thee oppressive hand;
So lovely, in her grief, doth seem my native land.

"'But where is Lucan?  see him there alone!
The hero's soul is beaming in his eyes&mdash;
I hear now for his land the heavy groan&mdash;
I see his sword all bloody now uprise&mdash;
Alone he's still, yet all the host defies&mdash;
See how they stare &mdash; he rushes mid the throng!&mdash;
The mighty squadron on before him flies&mdash;
It wheels &mdash; it gathers round in thousands strong;&mdash;
And now he falls in blood, or's led in chains along.'

"Thus would I, in Killarney, native vale,
My days of grief and loneliness pass on;
And one fair morn, (O morn of bitter wail!)
As forth I went, as soon as morning shone,
My eager look I hasty threw upon
That hill which last I saw my Knight go o'er;
But, scarcely now, my eyes have thither gone,
When, on its other side, I hear the roar
Of hundreds, who them hasty on its summit bore.

"At once my thought is on my Knight's return,
And all the youth that follow'd him to war;
And now, I cry, Killarney, cease to mourn&mdash;
Thy knight and all thy youth returned are&mdash;
The maids would rush to meet them &mdash; and yet far
The knights are from them, when they stretch their arms
O, maidens!  then how evil was thy star!
From stranger's glance now swift you turn your charms&mdash;
They rush &mdash; ye fly &mdash; and all the vale is in alarms.

"One eve thus in Killarney did I see,
Of fearful deer, a solitary few,
Who, on a mountain's fair declivity,
Did sport, as deer at eve are wont to do;
A flock of wolves, at distance far, they view,
And thither hie, as they a herd of deer,
Nor yet perceive the foe till near they drew,
When, wheeling all around, in wild career
They fly, and gain their herd, and scatter 'mong them fear.

"So here does gloomy terror seize on all.
The strangers come to where my sire doth dwell,
For whom their haughty chief doth loudly call,
And thus his high behest unto him tell:
'From Carmol, by whose sword proud Lucan fell,
I hither come; and me these knights he gave,
Thy only daughter, Dinah, to compel,
For him, this day, her native vale to leave&mdash;
Consent, or with her die &mdash; 'tis so doth will the brave!'

"He said, and straight Killarney all convenes&mdash;
But who are those, lone vale, that call them thine?
Thy youth have fall'n all on bloody plains,
And few the sons of war that do combine.
I sigh &mdash; I weep &mdash; the cause is solely mine;
For they would not me yield to Carmol base,
To coward Carmol, whose ignoble line,
And viler actions ever should disgrace
The last lone offspring of old Hermon's generous race!

"The aged knights fast gather round my sire;
(Their feeble limbs, by this, in steel they've clad;)
To battle on he leads them, and doth fire
Their souls with what in younger days they had.
The maids would join, but Hermon it forbade;
From sight of all apart we're made to go;
And there we sat to mourn our fate so sad&mdash;
At times we hear the shout and dreadful blow&mdash;
At times a dying groan, or hero's overthrow!

"As when, devouring wolves, the shepherds spy,
Descending from the hills upon their care;
The fleecy flock apart they cause to lie,
And stand alone the dreaded shock to dare&mdash;
It's now begun, and nought but clamour drear,
The hearing of the fearful fold doth fill;
Now, do they hear a knock, a gnash, or tear,
Or now, a wolf all howling at full will;
Which nigh, the tim'rous herd, with terror great, doth kill.

"So hear Killarney's maidens now the fray;
Ah!  'twas not so ye us'd to hear, sad maids,
When, at the long'd for close of summer's day,
The lute would call you to the well known shades:
Here now no youth, the dance so wish'd for, leads;
Here now no song, nor tale of love goes round;
But dread the din that still the ear invades
'Tis as when thunders o'er Killarney bound,
And all her hills re-echo to the awful sound!

"How many, Lucan, now do wish for thee!
'O send us Lucan!'  all the maidens cry!
'His arm it is that could us quickly free&mdash;
He ne'er in death 'neath Carmol's sword did lie&mdash;'
'Twas so the maids believ'd, &mdash; but, alas, I
Did b'lieve my knight by Carmol's sword laid low!
I thought I saw his form before me fly,&mdash;
I thought I heard him call me, and say, 'how
Can Dinah live, and her own knight in cold death now!'

"More dreadful soon, than yet, the shouts arise;
We all believe Killarney's fate is past;
'Our fathers fall,' each maiden sadly cries&mdash;
'We'll with them fall, &mdash; behold our doom at last!'
We sudden pause, &mdash; we stare, &mdash; we look aghast,&mdash;
Then shrieking fearful, towards the noisy plain
We rush, we fly, as wild, as dread, as fast
As herd of kine, when summer's heat doth pain,
Sweep down the scorching hill the wood or marsh to gain.

"We've reach'd the plain &mdash; away with all our dread&mdash;
Unto the foe our fathers do not yield;
But they before our noble fathers fled!
Who now have with them cover'd all the field!
We shout &mdash; each maid a stranger's sword doth wield;
And great the joy that every bosom fires&mdash;
Heaven, we cry, the injur'd ever shield;
See how around the haughty foe expires!
Our native vale shall rise long live our noble sires!

"By this the foe are to the mountains driven;
And on the field of fight we cast our view;
Like to a fallen grove it seemed, whom heav'n,
With all her oak and stately fir, o'erthrew.
And now we look to where our sires pursue&mdash;
But strange!  another sight to us appears,&mdash;
Adown the hills an armed body flew,
Awakening all the valleys with their cheers,
And shaking high in air their swords and threat'ning spears!

"In front, their haughty chief, all dreadful, came;
High shake his nodding plumes above the rest,
And bright his lengthen'd spear 'neath heaven's flame,
And broad the mighty shield before his breast
He stands; his people hear his proud behest;
O then t was, I Lucan thought to see!
''Tis he,' I cry, 'behold his well known crest!
And that his spear, and noble shield must be'&mdash;
I then fly toward the knight, but, Lucan, not toward thee!

"Ere I arriv'd, the chief had ceas'd to speak;
And now he rushes toward his aged foe,
Dread as that flood, which toward Killarney lake,
From down the noisy hill, doth rapid flow:
In him soon ev'ry one doth Carmol know;
And then what horror seizes me all o'er!
He did, I cry, my noble knight o'erthrow,
And these, his arms, as victor's prize, too bore&mdash;
I faint &mdash; the fight's renew'd &mdash; I hear, I see no more!

"And so I do, sir knight, long while remain;
But when I wak'd how dreadful is my fright!
The field is cover'd with the aged slain,
And gallant Hermon bound within my sight.
Carmol looks pleas'd, and proud in all his might.
Close by his side a younger chief doth stand;
I had not seen the youth before the fight;
Stately his form, his eyes full of command,
And all his nodding plumes tell him of Brydain's-land.

"How can, I cried, a youth so seeming brave,
So generous of look, and young in age,
Like Carmol, have a heart that would deceive,
That would 'gainst innocence oppression wage!
But such thou hast; with him thou didst engage
To do the ills which he this day has done;
Such ills as nothing ever may assuage!
Then sure, thou wrongly hast, O!  Brydain's son!
To gain thee worthy raced of hero brave, begun!

"So were my thoughts upon the younger chief,
When Carmol bids my sire to prison strong,
Then rushes where I am, and in my grief,
Leads me, thro' all his multitude, along;
My eyes are wildly cast amid the throng&mdash;
'All's over,' in my soul, I heavy sigh&mdash;
But no &mdash; great heaven look'd upon my wrong&mdash;
The youthful chief of Brydain's standing nigh;
He draws &mdash; I read the mighty purpose in his eye.

"'Carmol, the maiden yield, &mdash; wrong is thy cause!
In her defence my soul's resolved to die&mdash;'
He said, and from his grasp me boldly draws,&mdash;
Proud Carmol lifts his mighty sword on high&mdash;
The strife is terrible &mdash; in haste I fly&mdash;
Behind the shout and clash of bucklers are,
Dread as when thunder breaks from out the sky,
And sends his loud and wrathful voice to far,
That all the angry elements at variance are.

"Not far's a grot where once some sage did dwell,
But since so many ages by have flown,
That where the lonely grot, now few may tell,
So thick by wood and shady bow'r o'ergrown;
Howe'er it doth not rest to me unknown;
One morn I found it as I chas'd the deer,
And now me there, unseen by all, I've thrown;
And hence the shout of Carmol oft I hear,
And hence, at times, the dreadful contest doth appear.

"Oh youthful chief!  I cry, thy soul is great!
But fall amid the mighty throng thou must!
O!  if could Dinah now share in thy fate.
Her soon, amid thy angry foe, she'd thrust;
But thou, proud Carmol, base-born Carmol, dost,
Not life, from sad, and wretched Dinah, seek;
I never shall forget the day, when first
Thou would'st me from my native valley take,
But soon thee Lucan met, &mdash; thy strength, 'gainst his, was weak!

"Ere long fair Phoebus' light in ocean's lost,
And night, in all her sable garb, draws near;
The flying clouds are 'long the heavens tost,
And 'gins the lonely star of night t' appear.&mdash;
The fight has ceas'd, no more the shout I hear;
And now my thoughts are on Brydain's young chief;
He fell, I cry, and for him shed the tear,
For him awaken all my soul to grief;
Then do I weep my sire, now lost to all relief.

"And so I grieve until the mid of night,
When horror sudden seizes me all o'er;
Methought I saw, before my trembling sight,
An aged form, whose locks were long and boar,
And great his height, as he of sons of yore;
His beard, e'en too, down to his girdle clung,
And in his grasp a mighty staff he bore,
Leaning on which, o'er me he mournful hung,
And thus unto me spake &mdash; meanwhile the cave all rung.

"'Arise, young maid, arise, thy foe's asleep,
And long the weary way thou hast to rove,
And many the bitter tear thou hast to weep,
And many the heavy ill thou hast to prove;
Arise and go to search thy own true love;
'Tis he alone who can Killarney free,
And he alone who may thy ills remove,
But distance long divides him now from thee
Then haste, arise and go while sleep thy enemy.

"'To-morrow, ere the sun may ocean leave,
Carmol, and he whom Carmol late did send
To take thee in despite of Hermon brave,
And all beside who should the knight befriend,
Will swift to top of yonder hill ascend,
(Leaving below Hermon in chains to mourn,)
And with their knights there bide, for they intend
Not hence to ever move till thy return,
When thou away by them art hasty to be borne.

"'Then rise, young maid, arise, thy foe's asleep,
And long the weary way thou hast to rove,
And many the bitter tear thou hast to weep,
And many the heavy ill thou hast to prove;
Arise and go to search thy own true love;
'Tis he alone who can Killarney free,
And he alone who may thy ills remove,
But distance long divides him now from thee,
Then haste, arise and go while sleep thy enemy.'

"In haste I rise &mdash; my palfrey I do find,&mdash;
These arms, from where they fought that day, I bring
But oft I fancy, in my troubled mind,
That Lucan has been slain and's not living.
That night, howe'er, I spent in wandering;
And since, in vain, how many did I spend!
Me far through silent valley did I fling,
And over lonely mountain without friend,
That, should I tell thee all, my tale would never end!"

Here Dinah ceas'd; and Harmond cries, "O maid!
Great are, no doubt, the ills thou didst go through,
And be for ever bless'd the hero's shade,
Who would befriend the helpless like to you&mdash;
But Carmol base that youth of Brydain slew&mdash;
O Carmol!  thou art false!  thy actions foul!
The brave, the gen'rous never could such do&mdash;
The youth would save the maid, thy crime controul,&mdash;
O bless'd may be in death the hero's gen'rous soul!

"And Carmol has in chains thy sire so brave.
And he doth watch till thou return again,
When thy aged sire he will of thee bereave,
And thee unto his foul embrace constrain;
But, Carmol, thou shalt not, and 'tis in vain,
That thou, with hopes like these, doest glad thy mind,
For, ere to-morrow Phoebus 'dorn the plain,
We'll hie with Dinah till her knight we find;
To leave fair maiden in such case were sure unkind!

"And brave, O maiden!  was thy love in fight:
I saw him when the wars I went to view;
And you too, Harnol, saw the noble knight,
Many of Brydain's chiefs he overthrew;
But Carmol base never the hero slew,
Though so thou hast not, hapless maiden, thought&mdash;
O sad Ruennah!  now I think on you!
Fair Dinah has thy fate to mem'ry brought,
Though long the day since first thy tale my fancy caught.

"Dinah, and Harnol, ye shall hear the tale,
By that, bright morning will, methinks, appear:
But how may I such heavy woe reveal?
O shed with me, young maid, the bitter tear!
Ruennah now, methinks, I grieving hear;
What heavy anguish doth the maid assail:
And now she starts &mdash; 'tis Spardin with his spear&mdash;
And now she's on the mound &mdash; her soul doth fall&mdash;
O hear, young maiden, hear Ruennah's woful tale;

"The stars are bright, the moon in heaven is high,
And now the night in all her splendour reigns;
But ev'ry splendour doth the night deny
Upon the yonder lone and bloody plains;
And there, e'en now, darkness her pow'r maintains;
And there the ghost of night, in the red stream,
The blood of the self-murderer, now drains;
While o'er the wave the screech-owl's heard to scream,
And ev'ry ghost to yell that mars the nightly beam.

"And who art thou so lone upon the strand?
Wild are thy looks, and heavy are thy sighs;
Now doth the trembling steel flash in thy hand;
Now doth the fire of rage dart from thine eyes;
And what dread scenes for all around thee rise!
There doth a rock his rugged brow uprear,
And there beneath a hollow steep low lies,
And here are fens, and bogs, and caverns drear.&mdash;
Who'rt thou so lone amid the horrors of despair?

"'Tis, Spardin, thou; thy arms are on the heath;
Alone the mighty spear with thee remains;
But why the spear that trembles for thy death,
That soon must, Spardin, end thy mortal pains?
Yes, all the rage that in thy bosom reigns,
To be by Bendon's youthful arm o'erthrown,
And all the grief that now thy soul sustains,
Lest should, one day, its foul deceit be known,
Must, Spardin, soon be felt by thee in death alone.

"But who art thou so bright upon yon plain?
The glorious light of freedom's in thine eyes;
Nor doth of dread thy manly soul constrain,
That look doth speak the joys that with thee rise;
And &mdash; oh what loveliness around thee lies!
There fairest hills their hoary heads uprear,
And there a stream through flow'ry meadow hies,
And here are groves, here arbours, nature's care,&mdash;
Who'rt thou so bright amid the fields of hope so fair?

"'Tis, Bendon, thou; the well known bower is near;
And now in thought thou doest Ruennah see;
But no, fond youth; 'tis not Ruennah dear,
Thy love has fled the bow'r to, look for thee;
For so with Spardin and his banditti,
Thou didst, O youth, in cruel strife delay,
That she, the hour now seeing pass'd to be,
And hearing from afar the horrid fray,
To search thee on the heath, has gone a lonely way.

"But has Ruennah right to trust her love,
To wait him, e'en to search him 'mid the night?
Did there ne'er yet young hero basely prove,
Ne'er mar of maiden fair the virtue bright?
There did; nor has fair maid to hazard right
That, which if lost, her worlds could not console;
Howe'er, sure all Ruennah pardon might,
Sure here, at least, might censure save controul,
For who would not her trust to Bendon's noble soul?

"'O where art thou, my love? &mdash; but why those fears?&mdash;
Away with them &mdash; yet no &mdash; my hope then yields,
And oft, methinks, my troubled soul still hears,&mdash;
Still hears the far off shout and clang of shields&mdash;
But no &mdash; lone, dreadful silence, o'er those fields,
Now winds, as far from all, his drear career&mdash;
But, 'mid the dark, perhaps, some villain wields,
Against th' unguarded breast, the secret spear&mdash;
O where art thou, my love?  for thee how great my fear!

"'Could Spardin? &mdash; but forbid it to be so&mdash;
Could Spardin, Bendon's dreadful enemy,
Have sought, with villains vile, the overthrow
Of him amid the night's obscurity?
But oh what sight! &mdash; whom, heavens, did I see?
'Twas like to him &mdash; in hand a mighty spear&mdash;
And now what thought &mdash; but oh!  such terror flee&mdash;
His shout, amid the throng, late did I hear?
Oh!  where art thou, my love?  for thee how great my fear!'

"Thus doth Ruennah, on the silent heath,
Give to the night the terrors that her fill;
But terrors vain! &mdash; thy love fell not beneath
Proud Spardin's arm &mdash; O maid, he liveth still!
But Spardin and his people would him kill;
In night they fought &mdash; you heard the strife from far&mdash;
Spardin fled &mdash; of Bendon's armour he had, till,
When thy love low, he would thy virtue mar,
But free, O maid, from his embraces, now you are!

"And now him hear alone upon the waste:
'O hell of pain!  has mortal such e'er felt?
Some respite &mdash;!  ah one moment's ease at least,
Will not heaven? &mdash; but I, whose soul has never knelt,
Save in deceit, at heaven's holy shrine;
Whose pride has mis'ries to his country dealt
I cannot call on what is heav'n, &mdash; divine,&mdash;
O Bendon!  that my soul was great, was just, like thine!

"'Tis thou, not I, who canst on heaven call;
Thou to thy friends, thou to thy country true,&mdash;
Religion, honour, brav'ry, justice, &mdash; all
That's great in man, O Bendon, 's great in you&mdash;
But hold, my soul &mdash; why sink?  art thou not too
In semblance such?  and do not all believe,
As he, thee great?  alone thyself dost know
How thou, thy friends, thy country doest deceive,&mdash;
O fool who all his trust on semblance fair would leave!

"'But can my soul remain for always hid,
May never justice o'er deceit prevail?
And shall, what late attempt this night I did,
No mortal ever to the world reveal?
Accomplices are base, rewards avail,
Where neither honour, nor religion's found,&mdash;
And now, at length, me justice may assail;
But no, &mdash; e'en now, I justice shall confound,
Though guilt, though proof, &mdash; though all encompasses me round.

"'Then come, O steel compleat the wish'd for task;
On half, at least, thou canst my crimes impose;
For when the time shall come, that fools will ask
Why chose I thus my wond'rous day to close;
'Tis thus (as I foresee) the answer goes,
'Himself he slew, touch'd by his country's cries,'&mdash;
Or thus, &mdash; 'when rais'd to madness by her woes,'&mdash;
But wrong &mdash; I fall in hoping to disguise
All which, ere long, in justice should before me rise.

"'But wrong &mdash; I fall in hoping to disguise&mdash;'
So thrice through night his falt'ring voice he sent&mdash;
Then hasty doth the trembling steel uprise,
And near the throat, a vital part, it went&mdash;
He falls; &mdash; so falls a blasted yew uprent&mdash;
One look, one dismal sigh to heaven he gave,&mdash;
The night ghost o'er the stream his body leant,
Then pour'd his gushing life blood to the wave,&mdash;
So dies the coward, the base, but never so the brave!

"Now hath Ruennah rang'd the plains around,
And now hath long the mid of night gone by;
When she her near a lonely desert found,
With hills, and rocks and precipices nigh;
All was light; the moon look'd down from high;
And cross a drear, and solitary waste,
That near, in all its loneliness, did lie,
She hears the foot of one, as tho' in haste,
Whose mail in silence rings, whose step has often ceas'd!

"'O art thou he, art thou my love!' she cried?
'Now it is late; the moon has wander'd high;
One half her stars already from her hide,
And soon will morn awaken all the sky;
O!  art thou he? &mdash; O to my bosom fly!
Proud Spardin's people thee, I fear, pursue,&mdash;
My love, I fear, they doom this night to die,&mdash;
You've stopt &mdash; I hear no more &mdash; ah now I do!
O hither to my arms! &mdash; O let me die with you!'

"By this more nigh the wanderer has made;
And now he stops, now sighs, &mdash; Ruennah hears&mdash;
'O thou art not my love!'  the maiden said,
'My Bendon has not sigh'd!  how great my fears!
And who if not? &mdash; but 'tis &mdash; he now appears!
Behold his plume!  behold his noble shield!
But where the spear that he for always bears?&mdash;
Does other, than my Bendon, now it wield?&mdash;
Speak, love &mdash; approach &mdash; hast thou been conquer'd in the field?

"'For thee how have I sigh'd!  how wander'd all the night!
Yonder the strife. &mdash; I heard the clang of steel&mdash;
Proud Spardin's shout I thought amid the fight,
Then how Ruennah's soul did for thee feel!
But come, my love, come from the tyrant, &mdash; we'll
To far off land, where fate may better shield,
And where no more, in night, in secret he'll,
Against my Bendon's breast, the dread spear wield,&mdash;
Speak, love &mdash; approach &mdash; hast thou been conquer'd in the field?

"'Yet no &mdash; thou doest not come &mdash; thou doest but start,
But fill thy soul with strange, with dreadful thought,&mdash;
Ah!  why that hasty look to yonder part?
Say thence what ill that thee afrighten ought?'
She ceas'd &mdash; he spake &mdash; her soul's with tenor fraught&mdash;
'Twas not her love &mdash; 'he's slain,' the stranger cries&mdash;
Near yonder dark and lonely plains we fought&mdash;
He fell &mdash; I bear his armour as my prize&mdash;'
He said, and looking back, swift from the maiden flies.

"O how, sad maiden, now thy constant soul!
All hope is gone, alone distraction reigns;
From heaven to earth, her eyes alternate roll,
Now toward the flying knight, now toward the plains
Where told in death her own true love remains;
Nor from those eyes one tear to flow is seen;
She forward 'gainst a rock in silence leans,
As though in death her living soul had been,
So sad, so wild, so fix'd, so ghost-like is her mien!

"And long ere from her silent grief she woke.
Long ere one accent fell, or tear did flow,
But when, &mdash; 'twas then her soul to wildness broke,
Then show'd, in plaints and tears, how great her woe!
'Whither,' she cries, &mdash; 'alas I do not know!
My sorrows now, at least will ne'er be o'er;
If to the end of worlds my wand'rings go,
Nay, even there, they'll fly my soul before!
Then sorrows like to mine has bosom ever bore?'

She paus'd &mdash; a dreadful thought is in her breast&mdash;
Upon the rocks and steeps her eye she throws&mdash;
'Tis hence,' she cries, 'my only hope of rest,
In death alone my soul can find repose&mdash;
Again she paus'd &mdash; another thought arose',&mdash;
Afar the beast of night, the enemy
Of him in battle slain, now howling goes&mdash;
'Away,' she cries, 'thou to thy desert flee,
And leave, in death, at least, my own true love to me.'

"So said, forth from the rock she sudden springs,
Her bent is now to reach the plains afar,
And thitherward as light her way she wings,
Filling with fright the wilds that round her are;
As when at mid of night a lonely star,
Across the heavens in fire doth dart its way:
Old night beholding from her dusky car,
The sight, is fill'd with sad, with strange dismay,
Nor looks up more to heaven until the come of day.

"So fled the maid &mdash; and now arriving where
She h'd heard ere while the shout and clang of arms,
Around she throws her look of wild despair,
And wakens all the night with her alarms&mdash;
Why fly, ye wolves?  Ruennah not you harms&mdash;
She seeks her lover slain, and he's not here&mdash;
O must you, savage death, receive those charms!
Mark how she shrieks!  how dreadful doth appear!
O cease, ye wolves, awhile!  cease that her love may hear!

"For not beneath the later knight he fell&mdash;
But he no knight &mdash; ne'er brave in battle he;
Pale cowardice alone did with him dwell&mdash;
He'd fly, as death, the sword of enemy:
And 'broad, as pilfering elf, he chanced to be
This night, when Bendon's armour he did view,&mdash;
And where the coward so base but might it see?
There Spardin left it, ere himself he slew,
Lest it should lead that night to what his soul would do.

"Slow the coward advances, trembling all;
Cautious his step, his look on ev'ry side;
He starts at ev'ry leaf that haps to fall,
At ev'ry breeze that passes, gazes wide
And in such wise he doth long while abide;
At length, b'lieving his breast some courage hold,
He in the steel his trembling limbs doth hide;
Then rushes o'er the plain as hero bold,
Telling to all what he has to Ruennah told.

"Then cease, ye wolves, cease that her love may hear;
Three times he now has wander'd to the bow'r,
And there not finding his Ruennah dear,
Has b'liev'd her safe within her father's tow'r,
And puts their meeting to another hour;
But when, sad lovers, shall ye meet again?
Great the ills that Ruennah overpow'r;
Distracted on she flies from plain to plain,
Seeking her love in death, and seeking him in vain.

"'Ye've borne him to your woods,' the maiden cries,
'O stay, ye wolves!  and bear me with you too&mdash;
But why me fly?  what's dreadful in my eyes?
Bendon them lov'd, and love not Bendon you?
Then stay &mdash; I will the deed &mdash; heaven, pardon do,&mdash;
But 'tis thy will, however great my care,
All my long life to bear it willing through&mdash;
Hence never shall I yield to fell despair&mdash;
My soul is fix'd &mdash; great heaven will teach me how to bear.'

"So spoke the maiden, till she reached, at last,
The lofty summit of an ancient mound,
And here she stopt, and here she wildly cast
Her hasty look o'er all the gloom around;
'It was near this,' she cries, 'his death he found&mdash;'
She paus'd &mdash; the dreadful thought her soul o'ercame&mdash;
It's done &mdash; not swifter flames from heavens bound&mdash;
The night ghost bears the shatter'd body to the stream&mdash;
And since that steep re-echoes to Ruennah's name."

