The sun by this is high above in heaven,&mdash;
Is where he doth him rest at noontide hour;
And to the shade the herd his flock has driven,
To shun the burning heat which doth o'erpow'r;
When Dinah travelled has through many a bow'r,
And many a lonely way since morning light;
Then she with Harnol brave did leave that tow'r
Where they to rest them stopp'd now many a night,
Since Harmond did the tale of Bolden brave recite.

She with the knight doth search her Lucan still;
Nor with her more the bard now wandering be,
He goeth toward Limercus fair, where will,
Ere long, him Harnol and the maiden see;
For so did they, at parting, late agree;
Then all do wander towards Limercus fair;
For, quoth the bard, 'tis in dividing, we,
To search the knight, a double chance may share;
So did they all divide to search him ev'ry where.

Nor is the bard now wandering alone;
Architon, he whom Harnol late o'ercame,
With him to search brave Lucan too is gone;
Architon's brother e'en, Bandon by name,
Who ne'er would hear of merit or true fame,
Now follows too, by Harmond's counsel won
To love of glory, such as heroes claim,
Who ever do what is ignoble shun,
And bless the soul of him who has e'er nobly done.

And on they hie until they meet a shade,
By which an aged stream did winding flow;
And there them on the grass adown they laid,
Until the burning heat of noon would go.
Oft o'er the wave the bard his eyes doth throw:
And does his look the while emotion hold;&mdash;
"O there," he cries, "I saw brave knights laid low;
Beneath the silent wave now sleep they cold;
Oh hear their tale! &mdash; methinks again all to behold.

"On yonder side the sons of Brydain are,
Winding along the strand, a numerous host,
Come from their own high snowy hills afar&mdash;
Beside the sons of many afar off coast&mdash;
And 'mid them all their chief doth shine the most;
And from fair Gaulus' land afar is he;
Nor with his throng his mighty shout is lost;
Hither it comes amid its enemy,
And calls them on to death, or glorious victory.

"Nor silent Stuart, chief of Erin land;
Amid his host, a numerous throng, he goes,
And ranges all along the noisy strand,
And doth him for the doubtful strife dispose;
And oft, the while, his shout tremendous rose,
As 'cross the stream, at times, his look he threw,
To see where Brydain's chief his station chose;
But he none has, amid his host he flew,
Which wind along the stream as far as eye may view.

"From hence, not far, a town named Norda lies,
Where do for long the sons of Brydain dwell;
And who against all Erin land did rise,
That they accuse of persecution fell.
Stuart, the king such haughty foe would quell,
And 'gainst them late with mighty force he went,
But so did they great Stuart's force repel,
That though he cruel famine mid them sent,
In vain, before their walls, long time in siege was spent.

"Of such great contest Gellimus doth hear,
And Brydain's sons from far he comes to aid&mdash;
His powers, methinks, now yonder do appear;
And his the chief that all these powers has sway'd&mdash;
The other chiefs behold around array'd
In all their arms of shining steel so bright;
Each hero's soul is in his looks display'd;
They shake their spears, and lift their swords on height,
And call again the sons of Erin land to fight.

"Nor need the sons of Erin land be called;
No fear of fight doth swell their bosoms brave;
They see their foe advance, and, unappalled,
Do rush to meet them in the bounding wave;
As tho' two worlds their seats at once should leave,
And meet with all their mountains on the sea,
So loud the burst of noise that meeting gave
Either proud host &mdash; they join in middle way,
And spears and shields at once arise &mdash; dread is the fray.

"No soul of either host doth dream of flight;
Here nought but rage, and strife, and glory all;
It is who shall be foremost in the fight,
And for his country's sake the first to fall&mdash;
And does the weakest on the mightiest call&mdash;
But foremost 'mid the throng Lucan appears,
And though half 'neath the wave he still is tall:
Thick all around him fly the glitt'ring spears:
But still he foremost is &mdash; no foe brave Lucan fears.

"His country's freedom 'tis &mdash; his country's right,
Which now doth sway the hero's noble soul;
Alone hence stands he foremost in the fight.
As tho' he would that all should 'gainst him roll.
Oh valour high! &mdash; of greatness this the whole.
But he who war for other nation tries,
Yet leaves his own in bondage to condole,
Did ne'er sure feel true valour with them rise;
Such lost to him who cannot hear his country's cries.

"Next Lucan's Berwick, Stuart's spurious son;
Than he, no chief has wonders done more great;
He looks behind and calls his squadrons on,
As he alone would Brydain's sons defeat.
Next him is Dorton, chief of soul elate;
Then Nealus, knight long known in Erin land;
And Dungan next, who rushes to his fate;
Death, with his mighty spear, flies from his hand;
Nor knight yet has he met, who may his force withstand.

"Nor wanteth ancient Brydain knights like these:
Here Gellimus doth 'mid his throng appear;
Next aged Scomberg, who all seeming sways,
With Bergs his son, a knight of youthful year;
Kalmote, Denmark, and Kirk, are fighting near;
Three noble knights all matchless in their way;
Kalmote to send aright the flying spear;
Denmark, how best the warlike steed to sway;
And Kirk to bend the bow, and death at distance lay.

"But why should I forget my valiant son,
My Harnol, who doth meet the strife with joy?
To lift the spear this day he has begun,
Yet foremost, too, I see my gallant boy;
And near him Carmol doth his post employ;
And next to him his brother Carmiline;
Both lift their spears as ready to destroy
All pow'rs that durst 'gainst Brydain's sons combine,
Though they of Erin land, but of ignoble line.

"Thus all but Stuart combat in the fight;
Another station doth the hero choose;
Aloof he is upon an ancient height,
And thence the battle in its anger views.
Nor he nor Gellimus yet 'gan to lose;
Alike does either mighty host contend;
Here with the dead some chief of Brydain strews
The bloody stream:  and here his way doth bend
Some knight of Erin land, and death around him send.

"And all the while the shouts tremendous rise,
And clang of arms, that nought but discord know;
Man, chariot, horse, &mdash; all in confusion hies,
And all with blood Bubinda stream doth flow.
First of great Brydain's chiefs Scomberg doth go,
And with him death, whither he doth him wind;
Knight after knight his arm doth overthrow,
The deeds of old are burning in his mind;
And who durst in his rage the aged hero find?

"First Arundel would meet the hero's strength,
Tall Arundel!  a knight so great in fame!
His spear of yew doth seem a yew in length,
And broad his shield beneath the heaven's flame:
Scomberg him eyes, and wields his fatal beam&mdash;
All from around the chiefs do swift retire&mdash;
As tho' the mightiest two together came
Great Arundel alone is all on fire;
He too doth wield his spear, and 'waken all his ire.

"'Rebel,' he cries, 'if others fly, think not
That Arundel like them may also fly;
Thee, as the chief, long in the fight I've sought,
And now, proud warrior, gladly hail thee nigh.'
He said, and him askaunt the chief doth eye.
'Vain Arundel, believe him not,' he cries,
'Proud rebel who to day would willing die,
That Brydain's persecuted sons might rise,
Proud rebel never in such glorious contest dies.'

"He said, and hurl'd his spear with fury fell;
On through the groaning air it angry sped,
'Till on the globe form'd shield of Arundel
Aslant it came with all its vengeance dread&mdash;
If else, the noble knight had then been dead&mdash;
Just o'er the grasp it struck the middle part,
And half the brazen round thence with it led;
The knights of Erin land do fearful start,
And even now doth beat proud Arundel's great heart.

"Yet, gathering all his strength, he sends his spear,
And onward with such rapid force it flew,
That ere his shield to ward his foe might bear,
It pierced that plate, which guards the breast, half thro',
Then sudden fell; &mdash; now both their swords swift drew,
And each towards each on through the water hies,&mdash;
They seem'd as monsters of the deep to view&mdash;
One time, for Brydain's chief, the distant cries,
One time, for Arundel of fame, they do arise&mdash;

"At once the shouts do cease &mdash; the knights have met;
Now heaviest vengeance in their minds they bore;
And with such wrath each on his foe beset,
That soon with them the contest dread is o'er&mdash;
Great Arundel of fame is then no more&mdash;
Scomberg on him a blow so furious sent,
That shield and mail, and all that came before
Its matchless force, at once beneath it bent,
'Till deep within the hero's noble heart it went.

"He falls; &mdash; all Erin land doth heave a sigh;&mdash;
As when a prop, great guardian of some tow'r,
Against the angry warfare of the sky,
Thunder or storm, or what else may o'erpow'r;
Is met by Jove at length in wrathful hour&mdash;
At once beneath his vengeful bolt it lies,&mdash;
And now the tower beholding it no more,
And hearing still the anger of the skies,
Does, with his guardian's fall, up throw his mighty sighs.

"So fell the knight, and Erin land did sigh;
E'en Scomberg for the brave doth shed a tear;
And now on thro' the host again does hie,
To weet what knight so bold that durst be near;
But none abide, all fly as herd of deer,&mdash;
Great Ashton save, who would his force withstand,
But he too falls beneath the chief's dread spear&mdash;
Full length he is upon the bloody strand;
And once again doth heavy sigh all Erin land.

"Mighty the deeds of other heroes too&mdash;
Great Gellimus, Denmark, and Ormond young;
And Kirk, and Bergs, and many others, who,
Where'er they went, pale death around them flung;
But they apart of Brydain's host among,
Remote from where the mighty chieftain fought,
'Tis where the lowly vales around them rung,
With shouts o'er deeds that valiant Lucan wrought,
And more of Erin land who death e'er with them brought.

"Nealus and Kalmote now meet in the strife;
Kalmote, that best can send the spear aright,
And mighty Nealus, who to-day, of life
Many a hero has depriv'd, in fight;
Either great host doth anxious view its knight&mdash;
Th' unerring spear first Kalmote furious sends;
Full on the casque of Nealus doth it light,
Divides it in the front, and angry rends
That part just o'er the pole, and near the neck descends.

"For Kalmote loud do shout all Brydain's host;
Nealus in wrath swift flings his spear away,
And runs against the knight with vigour most,
That ere he well has come where he doth stay,
He 'gins with might his blows around him lay!
And loud they do off Kalmote's mail resound.&mdash;
Not long the valiant knight abide them may;
Headlong he falls beneath a mortal wound,
And loud the murmur of all Brydain's host around.

"Brave Berwick and wise Walker next engage;
He is of Stuart great the spurious son,
And this a noble hero and a sage,
Who mighty fame of late at Norda won;
In council and in strife alike he shone;
But now the hero's day of pride is o'er&mdash;
Him furious doth great Berwick rush upon,
And all perforce aloft in arms upbore,
Then dashed in wrath adown &mdash; for far resounds the shore.

"As some great oak, whose fair broad front uprais'd
Has long withstood the tempests of the sky,
Is by the spirit of the whirlwind seized,
And wrapt, in all his pride of bloom, on high,
Then thence in wrath flung down to fade and die&mdash;
The vales resound, fear fills all living kind;
And swift the flocks do to the covert fly&mdash;
The herdsman fearful too a shade would find,
And hide him from the angry spirit of the wind.

"So 'neath the hero's fall the shore resounds;
And now the shouts for Erin land are great;
Her knights all deal around them deadly wounds,
And Brydain's sons 'gin tremble for their fate;
One time they stand; one time they do retreat;
And all the while great Lucan's shouts arise;
Whome'er he meets at once he doth defeat;
And now where Scomberg is afar he spies,
And toward the knight on through the throng all hasty flies.

"The hostile host on either side gives way;
Two knights already do 'neath Scomberg fall&mdash;
Dead on the strand, Gerald the strong here lay,
And here groans 'neath his wounds Arthur the tall.
This Lucan saw, and on the chief 'gan call&mdash;
Tho' far off, Scomberg eyes him presently;
And so on either vengeful comes, that all
The warring chiefs, who here around them be,
Withhold them from the strife, their mighty feats to see.

"Ere yet they meet, thus Scomberg has begun:
'Say whence the chief that durst approach me near?
Is he of noble line, and has he won,&mdash;
As I, great honour at the sword and spear?
No; him I judge one by the king sent here,
With promise great, if I should to him yield;
But mark the sword, young knight, that all do fear!
Ere thou canst meet its edge, thou long shalt wield,
As I, the warrior's spear, and win in many a field.'

"'Hold, Scomberg,' cries the knight of Erin Land;
'Think me not sprung of an ignoble line:
I, too, as you, can fame of birth demand;
Also the honor of the spear is mine:
Nor think it is the king who may incline
My soul, thro' promise, here to make thee yield;
Unbid I come where I do see thee shine;
Nor do I fear the sword that thou doest wield,
Though long I have not fought, or won in many a field.'

"He ceased; and each toward each, in wrath, rush'd on;
What were the feats of arms achieved till now
At every onset mall or plate is gone,
And each doth bend him to the mighty blow&mdash;
So would two mountain floods, on meeting, go;&mdash;
But soon a strife unequall'd so doth end:
Lucan, in wrath, a stroke directed so,
That shield or else 'twere madness to extend&mdash;
The vengeful steel through all its way did angry rend.

"As shadowy darkness flies across the hill,
When clouds bright Phoebus from the world do hide,
So sadness now all Brydain's host doth fill,
As Scomberg falls, his arms extended wide
Thus falls a spreading oak in all his pride;
The flock the tempest of the heavens foresee,
And would them from its threatening wrath to hide;
Now haste to find their own beloved tree,
But him the blast has thrown, &mdash; they know not where to flee.

"So Brydain's sons, since their great chief no more,
Now know not whither from the storm to hie;
And angry Lucan they do fly before,
As herd of deer would 'fore the hunter fly.
Loud Stuart's shout from off his hill hard by;
Half Brydain's host he sees to Lucan yield,
And his big heart with every hope is high;&mdash;
Three times he seizes on his sword and shield,
As tho' he would share in the glory of the field.

"What knight of Brydain's host the shock first stands?
'Tis Gellimus; &mdash; his great soul cannot deign
To shun the strife, and he aloud commands
The flying powers with him to remain&mdash;
They hear their chief &mdash; the strife's renewed again&mdash;
A double ardour Brydain's sons 'gin feel&mdash;
To win or fall with Gellimus they mean&mdash;
Headlong in death tall knights around do reel&mdash;
And loud the shout of war, and dread the clash of steel.

"Now Powel falls &mdash; and now great Carlingford&mdash;
And Vaudry next, that never foe did fear;
And all beneath great Gellimus' dread sword,
That hasty sendeth death both far and near:
So ruinous flies at night the lightning drear.
The screech-owls of the lonely desert scream&mdash;
They see above their rocks the flash appear,
And how it doth just near destructive gleam,
That all would willing hide them from the angry flame.

"Brave Berwick first doth mark the mighty man.
His soul is bent upon one noble deed&mdash;
In all his sounding arms he vig'rous ran,
Where hundreds 'neath great Gellimus do bleed;
Naught can abide him as he doth proceed;
Through all perforce he doth his way compel;
From far does Gellimus behold his speed&mdash;
He runs, they angry meet &mdash; but who can tell,
The heroes' noble deeds?  the son of Stuart fell.

"Many of Brydain would behold the knight,
And 'mong the rest my noble Harnol came.
All wearied is my son from cruel fight&mdash;
The blood of heroes 'long his sword doth stream&mdash;
He views the fallen chief and asks his name:
'Great was he in the strife all day,' he cries;
'Though fallen he, not so his wond'rous fame;
Yes, that shall live &mdash; in spite of all shall rise,
And wake in future day him now that lowly lies.'

"He said; and now he's with the chief alone
The others eager do the strife pursue;&mdash;
But Harnol stays &mdash; he heard the hero moan,
And thought he might his day of life renew:
He lov'd a foe whom he so brave did view,
For all the day, share in the cruel fight:
No coward action did the hero do;
When foes did fall beneath his matchless might,
He would them aid, nor e'er exulted o'er a knight.

"My son him 'side the cooling stream down lays,
And doth him of his heavy armour free;
And now the evening zephyr round him plays,
That soon again in grateful life is he;
This Harnol sees and to the strife doth flee;&mdash;
The strife that even now more dreadful grows,
None idly gaze, all in dread conflict be;
And loud the noisy din of arms and blows,
But louder still the shouts that 'mid the battle rose.

"Carmol and Carmiline now dreadful go&mdash;
Amid the strife, together is their way;
Who, single, durst approach the angry foe?
Great is the knight of Erin land who may.
Carmol marks Lucan far amid the fray&mdash;
He fears, tho' aided, to approach the knight:
But nigh a rock of rugged round loose lay;
Its bulk he seiz'd, and hurl'd with all his might,
Nor err'd, broad on the chest of Lucan did it light.

"All thoughtless of such blow down doth he fall:&mdash;
As some great rock high o'er the boisterous wave,
Doth the loud roaring deep, the storms and all,
That durst oppose in open strife outbrave,
Until some fury of the blast would leave
His proud head low, and doth a bolt on send,
Which comes unseen, and, so doth him bereave
Of every strength, that down he doth descend,
And, ruinous on the coast, his rugged bulk extend.

"So Lucan now; and Carmol's shouts are loud;
The fallen hero's shield he flies to take;
But Dorton eyes him from amid a crowd,
Of knights, where he fought for his country's sake;
Away thro' all perforce he soon doth break;
And now he flies where mighty Lucan lay:
Two knights have seiz'd the shield, but he doth make
Them dearly for the venturous deed to pay;
In death he smote the two, and bore the shield away.

"Nealus soon joins, they over Lucan stand&mdash;
Carmol arrives &mdash; he durst not meet the foe,
But hasty gains the host of Brydain's land,
Shouting aloud great Lucan's overthrow.
With whom apart Nealus and Dorton go,
And leave him breathing life hard by a stream;
Then 'mid the strife again their anger throw;
Wrath for the fallen knight doth them inflame&mdash;
They rush through Brydain's host, and none but Carmol claim.

"But he no more is seen or heard to boast;
It was, that he did hide him 'mong the slain;
Yet still the knights do search him through his host,
'Till they, at length, its rear do wearied gain;
They own their rashness then, and search so vain&mdash;
In front the sons of Erin land 'gall yield;
For Nealus and for Dorton they complain,
These hear and from the foe they would them shield,
But cannot now &mdash; their spears hundreds around them wield.

"This Gellimus, wise watchful chief, had done;
He gladly let the knights to gain his rear;
And now he in the front of battle won;
No chief, that durst approach his pow'rs, is there,
Save Dungan, he, brave knight, the shock would dare,&mdash;
But Harnol, youth, 'till now, unknown to fame,
Who ne'er before saw war, or sword did bear,
Tho' single, slew great Dungan in the stream,
All Erin land then fled, hence great was Harnol's name.

[pp. 145-68]

[Continue]





The Dream. &mdash; It is evening; and Harnol and Dinah are wandering in quest of Lucan. &mdash; They travel through lonely parts. &mdash; The thoughts and reflections of Harnol. &mdash; It is night. &mdash; Dinah's fears. &mdash; Her reliance on Harnol. &mdash; The plaint of Alvel. &mdash; His tale. &mdash; Harnol frees him from Prejudeek. &mdash; Their reception at a strange house. &mdash; The song of Museus. &mdash; It is seductive. &mdash; Its bad effects. &mdash; Alvel's reflections. &mdash; His song. &mdash; Its happy effects.




Ah!  why awake? &mdash; It was a lovely dream!&mdash;
More pleasing, Zairah, than thou yet didst hear,&mdash;
Methought of fairy form one to me came,
Who did, all willing, 'broad with her me bear;
And thro' lone ways our wanderings sudden were;
Now by dark bower, now wood, now forest wide;
And Lucan great, and Merah chaste seemed there;
And Harnol brave, and Dinah sad beside;
And many others too; and much did all betide.

And sweetest song, that fairy form, the while,
Methought, did pour into my ravished soul,
As tho' she would it quite of all beguile,
So wild, yet pleasing, did her numbers roll,
As o'er my listening sense they witching stole;
And ever of the knights and maids she sung:
Oh, Zairah, ill thy bard may tell the whole,
So much e'er strayed the wanderers among,
And did such meed of praise to all their deeds belong.

And ancient bards, oft too, methought, were near,
E'er pouring forth their wild and tender lays,
Which could my longing soul for ever hear,
So did they sing of knights and maids always,
And did the while their song upon me seize.&mdash;
But lo!  that fairy form 'gain to me came,&mdash;
And, ere I wake, she me all anxious prays,
Of what I saw, to tell thee, maid, the same&mdash;
But ill may I, &mdash; in sooth, it was a lovely dream!

Bright Phoebus now is high in heav'ns no more,
All wearied low o'er ocean's wave he bends,
And fair the clouds spread heaven's plain all o'er,
And mild the dew of eve on earth descends;
When Dinah from cool shade her journey wends;
There she with Harnol shunn'd the burning ray:
Gay hope new strength her bosom ever lends:
As late, through lonely bow'rs, now is their way;
The flocks play 'round, the bird of eve begins her lay.

And fair is now the scene of lowly vale:
There silence, and the lily all alone,
Which seemeth for her absent love to wail&mdash;
Pale o'er the stream she hangs as grief were known&mdash;
Fair too the scene of hill with heath o'ergrown;
The lily pale, and silence too are there,&mdash;
Save where the gale through some lone shrub has blown,
Or rushes 'long the fern the fearful deer,
To gain his nightly lodge, strong brake or thicket near.

Nor wanteth, too, what's fair lone wood or stream;
All is, as evening still, both mild and fair,&mdash;
But not as Dinah, &mdash; her bright looks do beam
What's fairer far; &mdash; 'tis beauty, virtuous, rare,&mdash;
Such beauty as the looks of maidens wear,
On whom has nature shown her loveliest art:&mdash;
The youth sees all &mdash; and does he yield? &mdash; but where
The youth so strong, &mdash; so great of soul, whose heart
Now might not yield, did such as Dinah looks impart?

Soon do they find them far in lonely bower,
More lonely than their wanderings yet did try;
There darkness reigns, as it were midnight hour,
And stillness is, as nought were breathing nigh;
And their thick shrubs, and trees, and shades are high;
But human foot-track they may not find there,
As tho' none e'er the lonely way passed by,
Or far remote from every home it were,
Or mart, or any place where travellers journey bear.

And now more far the wanderers here stray,
But still doth all more lonely to them seem;
Yet, as they cared to find not other way,
Here still they wander do 'side shade or stream;
And often too by arbour dark they came;
Where tufted shrub and tree all plenteous grew,
That ne'er the sun might look into the same,
Nor from without the inpart any view,
So thick o'erhead and all around, their arms they threw.

And still doth loneliest silence all the while,
Hold every part around 'neath its domain,&mdash;
Save when, at times, that bird, which doth beguile
The silent hour of night, with her sad strain,
They hear far down in lonely bower complain;
Or when some stream, which nigh thro' arbours led
Its wonted way, to find the open plain,
Doth break, at times, upon the stillness dread,
As it lone echo were, and answered to their tread.

And doth the while the breast of Harnol know
Emotion strange, &mdash; such as ne'er known before;&mdash;
Now heavy sigh he in him heaves, as though
His noble heart great weight of conflict bore:&mdash;
And Dinah's eyes and his meet evermore&mdash;
And still they stray thro' dark and lonely part.&mdash;
Oh, does he yield! &mdash; and is his greatness o'er?&mdash;
But where the youth so strong of soul, whose heart
Now might not yield, did such as Dinah looks impart?

Yet, as the lightning skims and flies the wave,
'Tis so wrong thought the heart of Harnol flies.&mdash;
"I will not yield," &mdash; within him, cries the brave,&mdash;
"Arise, my soul, in all thy pride arise;&mdash;
If now her Lucan live, how could those eyes
Look on the knight, I meriting control?&mdash;
But why speak thus?  then if the hero dies,
Is that a sanction to a deed so foul?
Assur'dly no &mdash; then why say, 'If he live, &mdash; my soul?'

"Tho' Lucan never should behold thee, maid,
Nor any of the world should even know,
That I her, who on me did trust, betray'd,
Yet never will I, in my pride, do so.&mdash;
The fame of Harmond's son must nobly grow&mdash;
Of him the bard shall not hereafter say,
That he a cloud o'er all his fame did throw,
Did her, who on his soul would trust, betray,&mdash;
No, bard, my fame shall rise unsullied to thy day.

"Nor shall my sire, the aged Harmond, say,
That I, his son, did mar his generous fame:&mdash;
No, &mdash; live, ag'd bard, in all your pride, you may,
'Tis not for me that wrinkl'd brow to shame.
O proud, and great, and high, and virtuous flame!
Thus grant you ever may my soul inspire,&mdash;
Still teach me how to shun what bringeth blame,&mdash;
To live like hero is my proud desire,
But I may fail &mdash; O strengthen me, thou heav'nly fire!"

He said, and high his heart within him swells,
High swells above the thought of being low;
As when the ocean in his pride excels,
And doth his waves aloft to heavens throw.&mdash;
The maiden now and he no more do go
Far wand'ring thro' dark bower and lonely shade;
High open plains a way to them do show,
But lo!  'tis night &mdash; the moon's above display'd,
And all the world around, &mdash; now deep in silence laid.

The maid looks on the knight, &mdash; within her breast
Now fear doth come &mdash; O just, and virtuous fear!
Whate'er may show fair maid, 'tis this that best
Can show her fair, &mdash; than beauty this more dear&mdash;
But all is gone &mdash; her soul of dread is clear&mdash;
"I am not with the base," the maiden cries;
"Harnol, the noble son of Harmond's here,
He who did o'er my foe victorious rise;&mdash;
No more I fear, my soul upon the knight relies."

O youth, be proud!  tho' great thy fame in arms,
More great that fame the maiden thee bestows,&mdash;
And you, ye fair, that pride you of your charms.
Be proud, if e'er your soul as Dinah's rose;
If e'er ye fear'd as she, yet trusted those
Whose soul ye noble knew; but it were shame
That maiden should mistrust the great as foes,
As them, who ne'er on praise could make one claim,
For, all to female honor lost are lost to fame.

By this they 'gin to see if dwelling's nigh;
But long the plains they wander do in vain:
And now the moon's above in heavens high:
And faint, as tho' all wearied from her strain;
Doth the sad lonely bird of night complain;
While heavy all the flocks around them lie;
Save those that frighted start up from the plain,
And staring stand, as tho' much wond'ring why,
The lonely travellers should, at hour so late, pass by.

Ere long they draw nigh to a flowing stream;
All lonely on its bank the willow grows,
And fair the silent moon doth trembling beam
Upon its hoary wave, that murmuring flows
On thro' the mead toward where at distance rose
Some height, which did to heaven its front uprear&mdash;
With Harnol thitherward the maiden goes,
And, long the stream their way &mdash; but as they near
The height do draw, in mournful wise they one o'erhear.

"Hail, Bergus!  native stream," the mourner cries,
Long pass'd the day since we did meet before,
Oh happy day!  why ever did those eyes
Behold thee, blisful time of childhood, o'er?
No anxious thirst of fame this breast then bore,
My only wish thee, Bergus, to behold
Fair wand'ring thro' thy meads for evermore;
And then, as now, e'er thro' this mead you roll'd,
And murmuring to me here your sorrows often told!

"And I, fair stream, would often pity thee,
Yet, in my little anger, too would chide,
I thought no sorrow should with any be,
And why does Bergus murmur, oft I cried?
Does he not thro' green meads for always glide,
And doth he other bliss than that e'er claim?
Each day the sun smiles on him too &mdash; beside
Each night the silent moon doth on him beam,
Then why does Bergus murmur?  cease thee, lovely stream!

"Thus in my youthful day, ere grief I knew,
I often would thee chide, fair Bergus, here;
But now, as Bergus, I do murmur too,
Tho' like to him, thro' meads my way I bear,
And on me smiles each day the sun so fair,
And doth each night the moon upon me beam,
Yet still does grief my troubl'd bosom share;
No more I sorrow chide, no more exclaim,
Then why does Bergus murmur?  cease thee, lovely stream!"

Now him the maiden and the knight do see&mdash;
He sudden ceased, &mdash; cries Harnol, "whence thy woe?
We've heard thy tender plaint, and great may be
The cause of all the grief which thou doest know."
"Sir knight," the stranger cries, "my griefs do flow
From no great cause, yet great, no doubt, are they&mdash;
But since thou wouldst them hear, brave youth, I go
To freely tell thee all, without delay&mdash;
But sad my soul, &mdash; it swells with thoughts of early day.

"As you, Sir knight, I yet was young in year,
When first began my thirst of fame to wake;
And soon as e'er would morning then appear,
I would me to the silent arbour take,
There all alone my tender song to make,
Of heroes bold, and wand'ring maidens fair;
And often too, I sung for Menah's sake,&mdash;
For Menah, who true love for me did bear,
The maid for whom also my heart did love declare.

"And Menah to the arbour oft would hie,
To tell her tender love, and hear my song;
And to the maid my heart would ever sigh,
And breathe its amorous tale the whole day long.
Ah destiny!  what did I do of wrong?
That thou, so soon, from Menah didst me part,&mdash;
Sweetmond comes, bard to whom does fame belong,
He boasts his worth, and with seductive art,
First gains her sire, &mdash; next wins my Menah from my heart.

"And dear in Menah's ear were Sweetmond's lays;
Of love he sung, and all its happy hours;
How few it ever feel, and how always
It but the pure and tender heart o'erpow'rs;
And ever did he speak of streams and flow'rs,
And every tuneful bird, that any may
Have heard to sing in woods, or shades, or bow'rs,
That soon, he, with his sweet and tender lay,
Did seize on Menah's heart, and bear it quite away.

"But, Sweetmond, it was not alone thy song
That lovely Menah from her Alvel won,
Fell Prejudeek too lent his aidance strong,
And me in Menah's sight and all undone.&mdash;
'Who is Alvel,' he cried?  'a shepherd's son!'
And how could he of loves and battles tell?
Heaven denies such mighty gift to one,
Who is not bred where kings or lords may dwell;'
So would he speak, and all would b'lieve the tyrant fell.

"My home I leave, elsewhere for fame to seek;
And I do seek it long with toil and pain,
But ev'ry where still follows Prejudeek,
And renders all my toil and efforts vain:
He still doth say, 'tis not for shepherd swain,
To sing of maidens love, and hero's fight.
And where he comes there none at all will deign
To hear me or of loves or wars recite&mdash;
And where does he not come?  O there he is, Sir knight!"

He said, and straight a haggard wretch appears&mdash;
With thought he's bent, suspicion's in his eye&mdash;
And high on either side his head, his ears
Are fearful cock'd, and oft adown they lie
Until again he doth them raise on high,
Which oft he does, as tho' his foe were near.&mdash;
No sooner him the noble youth doth spy,
Than all in wrath, he lifts aloft his spear&mdash;
But ere he strikes, he bids the tyrant fell to hear.

"Base Prejudeek," cries Harnol, "doest thou think,
That if thou swayest those to reason blind,
That I may also to thy terrors shrink?&mdash;
No, reptile, here some other doest thou find;
Go to the fool, go to the low of mind,
To those who would it seems have pow'rful heav'n,
In its all good, and gracious gifts confin'd,&mdash;
Gifts that impartially are ever given,&mdash;
Go, wretch, to those, ere thou, in death, art headlong driv'n."

He said, and flung at once his noble spear;
But Prejudeek aside swift from it fled,
And then came eager on, as void of fear,
And aim'd a mighty blow at Harnol's head:
But with his shield the knight aside it led,
And, in such wrath, 'gan strike at Prejudeek,
That he, all wounded, shrieking from him sped;
And darkest glooms and coverts did he seek,
And still, as on he hied, all echoed to his shriek.

As when, from summer skies the southern wind,
Doth scourge loud Boreas to his frozen hill,
Wrathful he goes, and ever leaves behind
His threatening roar, which all the north doth fill,
So Prejudeek did angry fly until
Alvel can hear his shriek around no more;
And now he joyous thanks the knight, and still,
That he him e'er might thank, he solemn swore,
To be his bard, and with him travel evermore.

The knight consents, and all together go;
Nor is it long ere they do reach that height,
Which did its bulk unto the travellers show,
Ere Prejudeek and Harnol met in fight;
But 'tis not now, what then it seem'd to sight&mdash;
A stately court it is high raised in air,
Where Alvel, and the maiden, and the knight,
Do enter all, to try if dome so fair
Would let benighted travellers 'neath its roof repair.

And cheerfully it doth them all receive,
For there dwelt joy in which did many take;
Some to the song, some to the dance them gave,
That all the house with merriment did shake&mdash;
And now the lord of all doth silence make,
He would that Museus, his bard, might tell,
Of love, some tender tale, which could awake
Sweet pleasing thought &mdash; the bard consents, and dwell,
In silence, all, to hear what lovers sad befel:&mdash;

"Night's veil was spread, and 'neath the western hill
Bright Phoebus' car, as wont, each eve did lie,
While rose the moon, and silence ever still,
Sway'd undisturb'd, afar through air and sky&mdash;
When 'lone near Bergus' banks came riding by,
A maiden fair, in garment loose array'd;
Her tender bosom heaving troubl'd sigh,
And dismal paleness on her look display'd,
As sorrow, clouded nymph, had there untimely sway'd.

"And fair she was, if youth or beauty rare
Could leave a maiden worthy of the name,
Or virgin modesty, by far more fair
Than all can either youth or maiden claim;
For such her ev'ry glance did fondly beam&mdash;
And what tho' sorrow too did then appear,&mdash;
Sure sorrow ne'er can youth or beauty shame?
For oft attraction follows with a tear,
When faithful love, and gentle modesty are near.

"Yes when the blush doth sorrow discompose,
When swells the throbbing breast with woman fears,
'Tis then attraction most the fair one throws,
Tho' then the gloom of sorrow most appears;
And not when ecstacy the visage cheers,
And all the inly pow'rs of mirth arise;
For then no pitying look, no flowing tears,
Nor sad persuasive plaint, nor tender sighs,
Can urge th' unfeeling youth with her to sympathize.

"Thus while 'mid woe the fair one's beauty shone,
Distracted thoughts dwell heavy on her mind;
One time her rolling eyes she throws upon
Fair Bergus' flood, and one time far behind;
Crying as oft, 'Ah, where shall grievance find,
Where try unequall'd sorrows for an end?
O thou!  who art to ev'ry pity kind!
Who knowest best for whom thine aid to send,
Now look down grateful here, if here ought can befriend.

"'But sure all hope, all succour hence is far,
For far, far hence, my knight is doom'd to be,
For whom my woes, my tears, and sufferings are&mdash;
O Alcomb!  why did Lenah love but thee?
Sad maid!  did other win her heart, then she
Might better hope, but 'twas Alcomb alone,
That could do so, and from her arms now he
Is distant far, is in some part unknown,
O!  lead me to my love, or let me ever moan!

"'Yes, lead sad Lenah where her knight may be,
For he did dearest love the lonely maid&mdash;
My soul, dear girl, shall ever think on thee,
But death can us divide, he parting said&mdash;
And may not be in death my hero laid?
He may &mdash; but if he be, what woe is mine!
Not all thou, Lenah, for the youth hast stray'd,
Nor all thou'st felt, nor all thou didst repine,
Can equal, woful maiden, then one grief of thine!

"'O what a thought!  my Alcomb to be dead!
Alcomb!  who greatest in the hostile fray?
Who to the strife the sons of Dunmore led?
Whom fear'd the foe?  Alcomb, he all did sway&mdash;
And in the chase? &mdash; but ah!  the chase, why say?
A thousand sighs are gathering to my soul,
It calls again to memory the day,
When the fell boar 'neath Alcomb's spear did roll&mdash;
I'm snatch'd from death &mdash; he doth me tenderly console.

"'Then is my love, my dear deliv'rer dead?
Is he, who would for Lenah die, no more?
No, no, &mdash; ye pow'rs, who to the strife him led,
Did sure him save amid the dread uproar;
This soul doth say, his day is not yet o'er&mdash;
But whither shall her way lone maiden bend?
O thou who see'st all the ills I've bore,
And knowest best for whom thine aid to send,
Now look down grateful here, if here aught can befriend.'

"She ceas'd, &mdash; 'tis late-the moon is shining bright&mdash;
A bow'r is near &mdash; her path on thro' it lay&mdash;
She thitherward, when lo!  a stately knight
In all his steel, before her fix'd doth stay&mdash;
High on his helmet did the moon's light play.
Amaz'd the lonely maid doth frighted stand&mdash;
The youth upon her looks, but naught doth say&mdash;
Nor can the maiden more a word command,
She too looks on the youth, &mdash; he seems from far off land.

"'I've heard thy tale, lone maid,' at length, he cries,
'Nor fear, for tho' I am thy country's foe,
My sword, in thy defence, shall willing rise,
And I with thee, to search thy knight, will go;
For yet he lives, I did the hero know&mdash;'
She hears, and hope and fear are in her heart,
And on the knight her eyes she fixed doth throw&mdash;
He takes her hand &mdash; at times her soul doth start&mdash;
On thro' the bow'r they go, a still and lonely part.

"That night's soon pass'd, and now they've rov'd long time,
And ev'ry night thro' shade or bow'r they rov'd&mdash;
O where the maid that has not known of crime?
O where the breast that has not passion mov'd?
Then can I write the wand'rers unreprov'd?
Ah no!  the faithful muse must truth recite.&mdash;
No more by Lenah Alcomb is belov'd,
He banish'd is the maiden's bosom quite,
She loves but Breston now, Breston, the stranger knight.

"'And, oh my Lenah!'  'has the youth oft cried,
I'll lead you to my own green fields afar;
Thro' them fair Severn's stream doth ever glide,
And there cool shades and lonely arbours are,
Where nothing our delight may ever bar;&mdash;
From when bright Phoebus rises on the sky,
Until again at night his fiery car,
All weari'd 'neath the western hill doth lie,
We'll see our day of bliss in bow'r or shade pass by.'

"He said, and both fly to each other's arms:
'Tis in dark grove, where none behold them might&mdash;
Their words are low, &mdash; they speak of love's sweet charms,&mdash;
And close the maid does clasp her to the knight.
How either feel, &mdash; what is their great delight,&mdash;
'Tis not for muse of humble bard to tell;
But ever thus, afar from human sight,
The wanderers on their lone journey dwell,
Now through dark bower, now wood or shade, as it befell.

"At length, one eve, they in thick wood them found,
There darkness is, nor passage can they see&mdash;
And soon the storm arises, and around
The thunder's peal is often heard to be.
The maiden's heart is full of dread, and she
Clings to the knight, and often loudly cries,
'O hold, my love!  let us not hence to flee&mdash;
I fear the angry thunder of the skies,
But when within those arms no fear to me can rise.'

"He heard, and press'd her lips with kisses o'er,&mdash;
'And does,' he cries, 'fair Lenah love me so?
'Then I shall love but Lenah ever more;
Thou, Zellah, mayest give thy soul to woe;
True love for me, no doubt, still doest thou know;
And, Zellah, I true love too had for thee,
But wert thou e'er so fair as Lenah now?
Thy eyes would they as fix'd on Breston be?
O Lenah!  lovely maid, but thou art dear to me!'

"He said, and on her lips 'gain kisses prest;
Nor is the maiden coy to share the bliss;
She ever clasps the youth close to her breast,
And often on him too bestows her kiss;
And all the while the thunder raging is,
And often too the lightning passes near;&mdash;
But e'er it doth the happy lovers miss;
'Jove's partial,' cries the maid, 'we naught may fear,&mdash;
And could you not, my love, abide for ever here?'

"'I could,' he cries, 'but lo!  the storm is past,
And far, my own dear love, we have to stray,
Then let us hence, and yet while light doth last,
Find in this gloomy wood some path we may,
That can us guide to fair and open way'&mdash;
He said, and look'd around &mdash; but what a start!&mdash;
One near them was who heard all they did say&mdash;
And when he Breston saw he did depart,
As tho' he fear'd, but fear did never know his heart.

"The maiden wond'ring too doth on him gaze,&mdash;
And now on her he throws a look behind&mdash;
But what a look!  it on her soul doth seize,
That she all fearful is within her mind.
Ere far he went he stopt, when, swift as wind,
One to him runs, whose looks did beauty beam;
'And do I here,' she cries, 'again thee find?
Great seem'd the wrath that did thy soul inflame&mdash;
Say why swift after those that enter'd here you came?'

"'Who is the maiden?  was the knight thy foe?
Tall did he seem in all his shining steel&mdash;
And such the youth for whom this breast did glow
Ere it, brave knight, did for thee only feel&mdash;
Where'er he is, he loves me still, but he'll
Me love in vain, thou doest him far excel&mdash;
Come in this wood apart, 'tis lone, and we'll
There far from all in tender converse dwell,&mdash;
O bliss to be with one that loveth me so well!'

"She ceas'd:  he answer'd nought, but's silent still,
As in him he doth angry passion chide&mdash;
And 'gain he looks behind, &mdash; but horror chill
Doth Lenah seize &mdash; ''tis Alcomb's self,' she cried&mdash;
'And O!'  cries Breston, 'who she by his side?
'Tis Zellah sure,' &mdash; the maid her name doth hear&mdash;
She turns around, and on him gazes wide&mdash;
At once are in her looks both shame and fear,
Shame too doth Breston show, but most does rage appear.

"'Tis night at once, &mdash; and darkest gloom around;
Nor more the lovers do each other see,
And anger soon seems not among them found,
Alcomb's content, and Breston so is he&mdash;
Nor less the maids; so happy now all be:&mdash;
And, as before, apart their journey lay:
Alcomb with Zellah lies, fair maid, where she
Hard by a dwelling had &mdash; but far away
Breston with Lenah goes &mdash; where safe arrive they may."

Here Museus ceas'd, and all does wonder fill;
And much they praise the sweet and tender lays,
Excepting Harnol's bard, who's silent still,
As tho' the merit of the song he weighs&mdash;
And so he does, nor can he find such praise
Is to it owen, &mdash; "Its moral's just, 'tis true,
And sweet, perhap, its numbers too," he says,
"But e'en with these it should be virtuous too,
Else ne'er may happy numbers, or just moral do."

So says he in himself, and looks around&mdash;
He sees, and sure what all might guess he should,&mdash;
Each youth and maiden in loose converse found,
As tho' they b'liev'd them in some lonely wood,
And darkness 'round, where none descry them could;
Nor Harnol, hero of such wondr'ous might,&mdash;
Nor Dinah, maiden chaste, it more withstood;
He 'gins to b'lieve him Breston, stately knight,
And she, her Lenah, and both gaze with fond delight.

This Alvel sees, and in himself exclaims,
"Behold the wond'rous pow'r of vicious song!
Alike the breast of all it quick inflames;
Where here the maid, or knight, but's thinking wrong?
O bard!  is this why praise to you belong?
Is it to wake the thought of pleasures vain,
To stir up in the soul loose passions strong,
That you from all such boundless merit gain?
If so, this harp for praise shall never wake a strain.

"No &mdash; my virtuous harp, be humble still,
Hence bear of all the taunt, as e'er you've bore,
Since raising thee to fame is bringing ill,
O never raise one hope for fame e'er more!
But much it grieves this heart of mine full sore,
To see him who o'ercame fell Prejudeek,
And this dear maiden, too, by passions tore&mdash;
Will I to them of vicious folly speak?
Sure better pleasing tale of virtuous moral seek.

"Then come, thou heavenly spirit, to my breast,
And kindle there, as wont, thy holy fire,&mdash;
Teach me, if not to merit praise, at least
How best I may the soul of all inspire
With love of virtous deed, not base desire,"&mdash;
He said, and humbly ask'd would they draw near,
To hear a tale &mdash; such anxious all require&mdash;
They mark the rays that in his eyes appear,
And leave their joys awhile, and forward lean to hear.

"Dark rolls the gloomy night o'er Delhi's lands
Yet great the joy of Gulmaire's tow'r, tho' there
Fair Zunah weeping wrings her lily hands,
And beats her snowy breast, and rends her hair.
She fears the quick return of base Gulmaire,
Gulmaire, whose people have her here confin'd&mdash;
For, long their haughty lord sigh'd for the fair&mdash;
O hear her now in all her grief of mind&mdash;
Her looks are thrown to heaven, her sighs break on the wind.

"'O stay&mdash;!  O gather here!  ye passing winds!
Rise in your wrath, and snatch me to your skies!
For here, alas!  no hope my bosom finds&mdash;
Then bear me hence afar from Gulmaire's eyes&mdash;
He'll soon return, nor will he hear my sighs&mdash;
But ah!  ye go!  you winds, ye stop not here!
Then cease at least, Arvon may hear my cries, 
Arvon the brave, that Zunah loves so dear,
To Delhi's land, he lately wand'ring came, I hear.

"'Aryan, my love, then are you wand'ring nigh?
On top of Gulmaire's gloomy tow'r I be&mdash;
Ye roar, ye winds, but brighten, thou dark sky!
Brighten!  that Arvon may at least me see&mdash;
Then heaven is hard, it lends no aid to me&mdash;
Th' inconstant winds of night flee every where,
And still with all their angry roars they flee,
And dark the gloom that hangs in heaven's drear,
O!  will none save me from the arms of base Gulmaire?

"'But were my Arvon here, he could me save,
Arvon the brave, not long is pass'd the day,
Since he to Berton's arms fair Bella gave,
Bella, whom Gulmaire too had borne away.
My knight the maid did free without delay:
Hither he came, and all his wrath did fear;
Ten knights beneath his arm did fall, they say;
And Gulmaire too had felt his vengeful spear,
But then, as now, the haughty Gulmaire was not here.'

"She said, and cast one wistful look below&mdash;
All but the winds are still, naught doth she view,
Save the lone watch, that round beneath did go,
And who, at times, his gloomy look upthrew:
'No hope,' she cries, &mdash; 'what, heavens, will I do?
How drear is all!  'tis 'bout the mid of night,
The hour that Gulmaire is accustom'd to
Come to this tower, &mdash; but ah!  what distant sight?
What that amid the gloom?  was ever aught so bright?

"'It hither comes apace &mdash; but whither now?&mdash;
'Tis lost amid the night &mdash; Oh heaven divine!
If thou didst ever send of aught below,
That snowy form amid the gloom was thine&mdash;
But lo!  'tis calm, and 'gins the moon to shine,
And all the plains around I can descry&mdash;
Again the form &mdash; but oh!  what grief is mine?
A youthful maid, as fair as evening sky!
But say why comes she near?  O hence, lone wand'rer, fly.'

"Again the maid is lost, and gloom appears&mdash;
'Thou'rt gone, lone wanderer,' doth Zunah cry&mdash;
But scarce has said, when all at once she hears
The horn to sound, 'tis dread &mdash; Gulmaire is nigh&mdash;
Nought may be seen, &mdash; gloom still hangs on the sky&mdash;
'O!  not till now,' she cries, ' I knew despair&mdash;
He comes apace &mdash; I hear his chariot fly!&mdash;
The sound is near, &mdash; to Zunah it is drear!&mdash;
O!  will none save me from the arms of base Gulmaire?

"'But who thee, Zunah, lovely maid, can save?
Thy Arvon is not nigh, that loves thee dear;
Nor yet so far hence wand'ring is the brave,
But far, too far, alas he is to hear'&mdash;
But gone thy hope, now Gulmaire is just near&mdash;
The watch him hails, he tells, sad maid, of thee,&mdash;
''Tis well!'  the chief exclaims &mdash; but, maid, thy ear
What does it meet?  of steel it seem'd to be
The sudden clash, &mdash; and now what, heavens!  doest thou see?

"It is the strife, in all its wrath below
And one of Angel form is mighty there&mdash;
The fall of knight is heard at ev'ry blow,
And loud, the while, the roars of base Gulmaire&mdash;
The haste is seen of hundreds who repair.
To aid their lord, &mdash; but who so bold to fight
Against that form, which seems from heavens fair?
Awhile they gaze, then shudder at the sight,&mdash;
And o'er the plains around is heard their hasty flight.

"'O heavens!  are good,' exclaims the maid&mdash;
Her heart is full, she cannot utter more,
And thrown her look toward him who doth her aid&mdash;
But where is he?  he's gone, and all is o'er&mdash;
And now despair as great as e'en before,
Doth on the maiden's trembling soul fast seize&mdash;
'O!  did he fall,' she cries, 'amid the roar?
Then I will fall &mdash; but lo Gulmaire' &mdash; she says,
When doth he in his arms perforce the maid upraise.

"'O Gulmaire!  thou wilt not be base,' she cries,
He answers naught, but from the tow'r her takes,
And silent 'cross the plains of Delhi flies,
And over all that might him stay he makes,
And oft thro' wood, and shade, and thicket breaks,
Where naught but silence drear and gloom are found;
Nor to the maid one word, the while, he speaks,
'Tween dreadest hope and fear her thoughts are drown'd
And vain to pray for light, still gloom and darkness round.

"But fix'd to hear her fate at length her mind,
And soon 'tis light &mdash; and now he doth him stay&mdash;
Just near to thickest bow'rs they do them find,
Where from his arms he doth the maiden lay.
She on him looks, &mdash; he cries, 'not far away
We have to go; that youth has fled for pow'r,
That youth, who did so many for thee slay&mdash;
I fear his wrath, and hence do fly my tow'r,
Come, maid, and hide you with your Gulmaire in this bow'r.'

She heard, &mdash; and wildly threw on him her gaze&mdash;
He marks th' appalling terror of her eyes,
And all at once her trembling hand doth seize,
And bid the spirit of her soul to rise&mdash;
'I am not Gulmaire base,' the hero cries,
'Berton my name &mdash; you know my tender tale,
And told it on the tow'r 'mid all your sighs;
I then was near, and heard you loud bewail,
But did me under maiden's guise the while conceal.

"'I came to slay Gulmaire, and you to free,&mdash;
For Berton heard his people had you ta'en;
I'll do, I cried, what Arvon did for me,&mdash;
I'll free the maid, or for the maid be slain&mdash;
You saw me wait the foe, &mdash; it was not vain&mdash;
The base Gulmaire and all his people fell&mdash;
Then why does Zunah give that bosom pain?
'Twas wrong to try a heart that loves so well,
I am not base Gulmaire, thy fright, fair maid, repel.'

"He says, and off him Gulmaire's armour takes,
When he, as maiden snow white clad, appears&mdash;
'Sure terror now,' he cries, 'that breast forsakes&mdash;
But, Zunah, do I yet behold thy fears?
Ah!  why that doubtful look?  those gushing tears?
Dost thou believe a foe in Berton nigh?
One that a base design for Zunah bears?
And would Berton be such?  no, maid, not I,
For all the herds that range the plains of fair Delhi.

"'It is the base, it is Gulmaire that would
Betray the maiden of a noble knight,
But Arvon, valiant hero, never could&mdash;
Nor shall Berton, he too is great in might&mdash;
And heroes, maid, have felt his sword in fight,
And bards 'gin spread his noble fame in song,&mdash;
And this alone his pride, his great delight;&mdash;
Then would he, by thus basely doing wrong,
Mar all the deeds that to his soul of pride belong?

"'He would not, sure, &mdash; then from thee terror take&mdash;
As Arvon, I do love the faithful maid,
And I did try thee for the hero's sake,
For he did try my Bella' thus he said,
Ere he her to these arms home safe did lead
And he did find the maiden faithful too&mdash;
O heaven!  of all thou hast of great display'd,
That we behold with highest transport do,
It is that maid whose soul is virtuous and true.

"'Zunah, be such, and banish all thy dread:
No more thy vale its home to thee denies,
Its bounds are near. &mdash; The noble hero said,
And leads her on &mdash; her soul on him relies;
Nor false the trust &mdash; and soon do Arvon's eyes
Behold the virtuous maid &mdash; she gave her hand,
And bless'd the brave; meanwhile doth mirth arise&mdash;
Gulmaire is slain, each maid's exclaiming, and
Soon doth great Berton's fame resound through Delhi's land."

Here Alvel ceased, and praises all bestow,&mdash;
Such praises as to virtuous bard belong:
And great the mind which every look doth show,
No more they feel the power of passions strong,
For filled now all with generous Alvel's song&mdash;
It is with what might virtue's self adore&mdash;
Harnol and Dinah own they thought on wrong,
And now they praise their bard oft o'er and o'er,
And lower their eyes, and blush at what they felt before.

