When cruel Mars, now satiate with war,
Forsook the ravag'd hills of Erin Land,
And desolation spread his banners far
Along the borders of her bleeding strand;
Then Lucan, who did long such scenes withstand,
Dejected sought his Dinah's native vale,
His country leaving 'neath Brydain's command;
Brydain, the dreadest that might foe assail,
Her sons long time for deeds, renown'd in ancient tale.

Since order superstitious there found day,
Since pride of Roman chiefs did her oppose,
Many a hero ever own'd her sway,
And trembling bow'd 'till Corsicus arose;&mdash;
But, thou, too sure, sad prince, hast fallen with those,
Though great, as who erst 'sieged Dardanus' shore,
Or he who prov'd the chief of Roman foes,
And sorely toiled the Alpine summits o'er,
Yet found, like thee, at length, not happier fate the more.

So true that fate regardeth line of none;
The monarch, highest in imperial state,
Or chieftain, who dread fields and realms won,
As lowest wight, impartially she'll treat;
What then behoves it to be brave or great?
Since she, who dealeth woe and bliss to all,
Bestoweth thus her gifts with even rate;
The lowest raising now to monarch's call,
Or now portending haughty monarch's wished for fall?

But thou, O Corsicus!  hast felt her rage;
To all, save fame, at length thou bidst adieu:
So 'twas with Lucan, knight of former age,
When fortune frown'd he felt not less than you.
Killarney hills he now in thought doth view,
And 'gins his breast to feel that killing pain,
Such as the breasts of heroes ever do,
When they return where liberty did reign;
When see what once was theirs, and not be theirs again.

"Fair seat, adieu!"  the hero sadly cried;
"Some foe, perhap, will claim thee now his own;
And thy own Lord mayn't near thee more abide,
But pass to country distant and unknown,
'Mid deserts there to seek a dwelling lone,
And learn to bear what fortune doth decree:
Ah!  cruel'st they who have those ills bestown!
Who have, by wrongful strife and tyranny,
Brought desolation on a land of liberty!

"'Tis, Brydain, thou who of it art the cause&mdash;
But no &mdash; 'tis wrong thee, Brydain, thus to use&mdash;
Thy king, O Erin land!  such evil draws
Upon thy plains, for he did rights abuse&mdash;
O!  curse upon the prince, whose partial views
Would force his people justice to demand!
But, injur'd brave, my country loudly sues
For mercy now at thy all conquering hand;
Nor, Brydain, vengeful look upon a fallen land.

"But fixed the sacred ordinance of Jove,
Then vain to hope, or long for happier state,
What's sanction'd by that awful will above,
Below we own, and call unbias'd fate,
Which earthly born ne'er may extirpate;
All hail!  then, mighty hand of destiny!
Thus willingly we bow beneath thy weight;
And grant, if yet thou bind posterity,
It may as freely own, and bow as now do we."

So spake the hero in his troubled soul;
And now he has the day in travelling past;
No more doth Phoebus through the heavens roll,
His fiery wheel behind that hill is cast,
Where he doth 'bide as long as night doth last;
And now the wearied herd sleep on the plain,
And all the drowsy clouds are gathering fast,
To where their lodge in heaven each night they deign,
Till fair Aurora wakes them on the sky again.

And now all wearied he's from travelling far,
And his light steed's unable more to go;
Beside him close fair groves and bowers are,
And just before a tower itself doth show,
On which the silent moon her light did throw;
And now the doubtful thought is in his breast,
If he, straight to the tower shall hie, to know
If it can give an inn to knight distress'd,
Or if unto the bow'rs, &mdash; when lo!  a warrior's crest.

"A noble knight," quoth Lucan, "doth he seem!
His spear how long!  himself how great in height!
He is, if I not wrongly do him deem,
A guard upon this lonely tower to night;
It well hath chosen one of seeming might"&mdash;
No more he said; the stranger doth him spy;
And Lucan from his weari'd steed 'gan light;
And been to him, who seems on watch, drawn nigh,
Demandeth who doth dwell within the tower hard by.

The gloomy stranger nought to him replied,
But raised at once his long and mighty spear;
Nor is hereat brave Lucan terrified;
Also, with his uprais'd, he draweth near;
And when the stranger sees him not to fear;
"O wrong!" he cries," on you my wrath to wreak;
I vengeance never against a stranger bear;
Thee for a dreaded foe I did mistake&mdash;
In sooth great fault of mine &mdash; but knight, what wouldst thou? &mdash; speak."

"I ask," quoth Lucan "then, who keeps the tower;
For now all wearied is my faithful steed,
And long fatigue me too doth overpower&mdash;
Without repose not far I may proceed."&mdash;
"Hard is thy case," the stranger cries, "indeed!
Fatigue, me, too, did often times possess;
When heroes by my sword in fight would bleed,
Or when I far the flying foe would press,
I and my faithful steed were often in distress.

"And many fell beneath Timerdin's spear!
And many has he often put to flight!
My soul, strange sir, has never known of fear,
My body ne'er has bow'd to mortal wight."&mdash;
"Oh!"  Lucan cries, "thou'rt sure a noble knight,&mdash;
But, pray, who in the tow'r hard by, doth dwell?"
The stranger loudly cries, "Yes, Sir, I might,
Who dwells within the tow'r hard by, thee tell,
But does he live who may this soul to it compel?"

"Sir," Lucan cries, "if thou couldst understand,
That I through threat did aught of thee require,
Thy pardon I should readily demand"&mdash;
"Pardon!"  exclaims Timerdin, all on ire,
"Too late it is, Sir, pardon to desire;
Fall at my feet &mdash; be ever hence my slave,
Or soon thou shalt beneath this arm expire"&mdash;
Lucan in wrath, aside his steed 'gan leave&mdash;
Timerdin takes to flight, no battle he doth crave.

The knight much wonders at his swiftness fleet;
And now he hastens toward the tow'r alone;
And, when just at its portal, he chanc'd to meet:
A beauteous maiden, making there sad moan;
"What grief," he cries, "has one so lovely known?"
The mourner startled when the knight she spied,
And her fair looks, that to his eyes were shown,
All swift beneath her silken veil did hide,
As modest maid, who might not strangers look abide.

"O!  art thou, Sir, she cries, a stranger here?"
(After to have long while the knight beheld,)
"I am," he cries, "and 'tis fatigue severe,
To seek a night's repose, has me compelled;
From near, this tower I saw, and thought there dwell'd
Therein some one, who night's repose might give;
And wrong, perhap, my star has me impell'd&mdash;
But tell me, beauteous maiden, why you grieve?&mdash;
Is he, that wrongs thee, near?  who in the tow'r doth live?"

"O glad I am!  sir knight, to have thee met!
Well hast thou 'scap'd, indeed, vain Merah's power&mdash;
Hence hence!  as death, Sir, let you hasty get,&mdash;
Dread the contagion of that hated tow'r;
Not yet, in sooth, has pass'd a single hour,
Since here four foolish knights did enter in;
And Merah now with crime doth them o'erpower,
I hear them, &mdash; e'en to revel they begin,&mdash;
O well!  hast thou, sir knight, escap'd such grievous sin.

"But wert thou too with them, more great my moan,
For cause more great should then my woe awake,
As 'tis, sir knight, for them I grieve alone,
He is not near who wrong to me doth make:
Then quit this sinful place for dear maid's sake:
I live within the grove you yonder see,
And, if thou wilt, I shall thee thither take,
There from ill hap at least, thou canst be free;
Our way lies through these bow'rs; knight, wilt thou come with me?"

"O fair and virtuous maiden!"  cries the knight,
How great the debt of gratitude I owe!
I'll, sure, what I possess may it requite,
A life of thanks full little is, I know;&mdash;"
He said, and did consent with her to go;
And now they have far from the tower past,
And in the bowers they wandered to and fro&mdash;
Now does the moon her beams around them cast,
And, darkness, now them hid, 'mid all thy gloom, thou hast.

And long it was ere they did reach the grove;
And she the knight through many ways long brought;
Now would they far through lonely arbours rove,
And now through ways that man had never sought:
For she a maid of base desire, who thought
To bring the knight to her fell passion slave;
And oft with love for him her soul seems fraught;
But, maid, thy wiles for meaner bosoms leave,
'Tis not for them to sway the soul of him that's brave.

Her dwelling was far in the lonely grove,
And circl'd round with many a shady tree,
Which so o'er head their spreading branches wove,
That ne'er the moon the lowly house could see;
And not a soul doth in it dwell but she.&mdash;
The knight leaves in the grove his faithful steed;
And now, all wearied, entered in they be,
When straight the courteous maiden doth proceed
To get her guest some fare, which he so much doth need.

And much of costly meat and wine she brings,
And all that wakes a wish for pleasure vain;
And while he sups a tender song she sings,
Or tells a story sad of lover's pain:
Now how a maid did of a youth complain;
Now how a youth did call on cruel maid;
And all the while within doth silence reign,
Nor aught without disturbs the lonely shade,
Save when, at times, they hear the wearied steed to tread.

And now the youth doth tell all he has past;
Of Dinah's love and many a cruel fight,
And weary journey long, until, at last,
She found him near the lonely tow'r that night;
And all the while he does the tale recite,
The maid for him did tenderest pity show
Now would from her fair eyes, so shining bright,
Adown the sparkling tear be seen to flow&mdash;
And now she'd heavy sigh, as maid who grief did know.

And, she would cry, "not thy ills pass'd I grieve,
For one more great than all thou'rt doomed to bear:
Thy Dinah is &mdash; O who could it believe!&mdash;
But I will, sir, the heavy tidings spare."&mdash;
The knight much wondering bids her all declare;
But she, nought answering, shows him to his bed,
Where scarce he has him flung, now filled with care,
Than he doth hear her cross the chamber tread,
And, as he were asleep, thus grieves she at his head.

1.
"Sleep on, and happy if thus sleep
Would never fly the couch of thee,
But thou, alas!  art born to weep,
And thus shalt wake by night like me.

2.
"When thou wilt see thy love no more,
And be by tyrant's law oppressed,
And hope of future fame give o'er,
What then may lull thy soul to rest?

3.
"O Carmol!  didst thou not betray,
Constant remain she ever might,
But since thou hast her borne away,
No more she thinks upon her knight.

4.
"And hence, when he all day in woes,
Oppress'd perhap by tyrant's chain,
Who shall each night his griefs compose?
Who, in her tears, divide his pain?

5.
"Ah Dinah!  it must ne'er be you,
For thou art in another's arms,
And thou hast been to him untrue,
Who could alone deserve thy charms.

6.
"Then sleep, and happy if thus sleep
Would never fly the couch of thee,
But thou, alas art born to weep,
And thus must wake by night like me.

7.
"For I shall hence by night awake,
And while you far off grieving be,
I here alone my plaint will make,
And grieve the live long night for thee.

8.
"But wouldest thou not from me depart,
No grief my night should ever know;
Nor ought affliction touch thy heart,
For here thou couldst be free from foe.

9.
"And here no Carmol ever would
Intrude to bear me from thy sight;
Nor is he under heaven, who could
Make me forget my noble knight!

10.
"Each morn we'd rise at early hour,
And wake the grove with our alarms,
And when the day in hunting o'er,
I'd lie all night within those arms.

11.
"But why with this relieve my woe?
To-morrow ere the sun arise,
The hero will far from me go,
Unconscious of my tears and sighs!

12.
"Then shall I hence by night awake,
And while you far off grieving be,
I here alone my plaint will make,
And grieve the live long night for thee."

At this she ceas'd; the knight did troubled hear&mdash;
'Tis darkness all, &mdash; and still the maid is nigh;
Oft on his cheek doth fall her burning tear,
And o'er his breast he feels her heavy sigh:
And all the while his proud heart did defy
The maiden's plaint, and tears, and sighs, and charms;
For when he thought upon his actions high,
Then fled base thought, and all its foul alarms,&mdash;
O!  who would not be, like to Lucan, great in arms!

And, ye, who pride you of a valiant soul,
Ye, who would be, as mighty Lucan, great,
Ever, like him, avoid what's basely foul,
And hold a heart of virtuous pride elate;
And ye shall rise to hero's glorious state&mdash;
But is there who would have such worthy fame,
And yet would not brave Lucan imitate?
O such be still!  or let him hide for shame,
For he doth merit not the hero's noble name.

"Fair maid," he cries, &mdash; she startles when she hears,&mdash;
"Fair maid, I've heard the plaint which thou didst tell,
And I have felt your sighs, and felt your tears,
And I may know how much you love me well&mdash;
Fortune's to me undoubtedly cruel,
And long it may me yet oppress with care,&mdash;
But though it should, O maiden!  me compel
To know what could drive all e'en to despair,
Still would this heart of pride, unshaken, bid me bear.

"Dinah, if thou hast been to me untrue,
If thou the path of virtue fair didst shun,
'Tis not for me alike to basely do,
And mar the splendid glories I have won&mdash;
Still be great, my soul, be as thou hast begun;
And though the tyrant doom to slavery,
If I can say to thee, 'thou hast well done,'&mdash;
Then 'tis not tyrant's chain, 'tis liberty,&mdash;
And I can say, my soul, thou art than his more free."

"O hold!  great youth," she cries, &mdash; "I'll tell thee all,"
Not more she could; &mdash; they hear a mighty shout;
Mighty, as though the grove to earth did fall,
Or shook her ancient oak and fir throughout.
The knight wond'ring looks for his arms about;
And now nought but his sword and shield he minds;
And been with these, swift from the maid, gone out,
Tall Timerdin, before four knights, he finds,
Loud as that angry god, who comes before the winds!

And, in the mid of all, a maid he saw&mdash;
Wild were her looks, dishevelled her fair hair,
And her sad heart, seemed so oppress'd with awe,
That she did go she knew not how or where;
And all the while the knights do shout and swear;
But none seems like to Timerdin in might:
He shakes his mighty spear aloft in air;
And now he boasts his strength, and now his height;
And oft he strikes the trees, and oft he calls for fight!

Lucan, ere now, by all the knights is seen;
First comes Timerdin, shaking high his spear;
But ere the sword of Lucan drawn has been.
The watchful knight flies swift away for fear:
Thus from the hunter's javelin 'scapes a deer;
From out the brake, across the plain it flies;
He grieveth much to miss a prey so near,&mdash;
And looking after, oft admires its size,
And now its stately horns, and now how swift it hies.

So did Timerdin Lucan 'scape thro' flight;
Which soon three other knights do imitate;
For ne'er before saw they their chief at fight,
And deemed his valour of the highest state,
And hence, much feared who put him to retreat;
But he who 'bides did well Timerdin know;
He doth not think Lucan a knight so great;
And now, tho' lone, hoping his overthrow,
'Gainst him the spear to hurl, doth bend his body low.

It comes aloft, and Lucan does him bend;
But ere it reaches where the knight doth stand,
It so unwieldly did the other send,
It meets, in its mid part, a tree at hand,
And broken flies about without command&mdash;
The shield would Lucan raise to guard the head,
But ere he might, that part held by the hand
Against his temple with such fury sped,
That on the ground he falls, as knight that had been dead!

As when some mighty cliff, high up in air,
Hearing the roar of Jove 'long heavens run,
And seeing now his bolt descending drear,
With cloud enwraps his head, the shock to shun&mdash;
But late &mdash; the havock is already done&mdash;
From off a rock it broken did rebound,&mdash;
And so apart the cliff's tall frount doth stun,
That groaning deep, he falls upon the ground,
With all his craggy arms in ruins scatter'd round.

So, fallen too, the mighty Lucan lay.
The stranger knight with shouts doth heaven rend,
And turning to the maiden now, 'gan say,
"Behold that man who would thee late befriend!&mdash;
How soon my arm him lifeless did extend!"
He said, and call'd for those who from him flew,&mdash;
And 'gain he doth a shout to heavens send;
And now his shining sword all hasty drew,
To lop the head from him, that his long spear o'erthrew.

O!  who, from instant death, may save the brave?
Heaven alone &mdash; but what its instrument?
'Tis that sad maid whom he would willing save,
'Tis she, to free the knight, whom heav'n hath sent&mdash;
And even now she doth the way invent&mdash;
Right well she guess'd that he had not been dead,
Having seen how the spear against him went,
And as the sword is rais'd, away she fled&mdash;
The knight must needs pursue, so after her he sped.

Swift towards the closest part the maiden runs,
And thither her the knight as swift pursues;
But so his grasp, from tree to tree, she shuns,
That much of time he now, in vain, doth lose;
And oft she shrieks, the fallen knight to rouse&mdash;
But could no more &mdash; all strength her soul forsook,&mdash;
When Lucan hasty from his swoon uprose&mdash;
Around, as one in maze, he threw his look&mdash;
And where the shriek he heard in wrath him thither took.

As comes great angry Jove 'mid cloud and flame,
Loud threat'ning wood or tower to lay low;
So terrible in wrath on Lucan came
Against that knight, who did him late o'erthrow&mdash;
As tho' ten arms at once did give the blow,
Beneath his mighty sword adown he fell&mdash;
Th' astonish'd maiden wond'ring stands, as though,
From out that gloomy gulph where souls do yell,
She saw her sudden snatch'd, again on earth to dwell.

Soon calm, as when the storm o'er head is passed,
All present now.  The maiden doth regain
Her strength at once, nor looks she more aghast,
As hope in her fair breast 'gan hold his reign&mdash;
Upon the knight her beaming looks remain,
And full her heart &mdash; this gratitude divine&mdash;
Not else she tells what doth her bosom mean;
'Tis so the moon, escaped some storm malign,
Doth silent on the heavens, in grateful wonder shine.

"Fair maiden," Lucan cries, "I know thy heart;
Then speak, and tell whence did the knights thee bear."
Words yet she finds it painful to impart,
And looking where the tower did late appear,
She fault'ring cries, her arm in pointing there,
"Thence 'tis, O gallant sir!  the knights me brought;
And they belong to Carmol base I hear&mdash;
For Carmiline, his brother, they me sought,&mdash;
But thou, O worthy knight!  hast my deliverance wrought."

She can no more &mdash; again her heart doth swell&mdash;
And 'gain her eyes would tell what she doth know;
And so she brings him where her sire doth dwell
Nor he in words his gratitude doth show:
Adown his aged cheek the tear did flow;
And seemed he one of ev'ry sense beguil'd;
And now his look he on the knight doth throw,
And now upon the maid, in transport wild,
Then clasps her to his arms, and cries, art thou my child?

O yes, he cries, my own dear child thou art!
And, Carmiline, thy people's strength was vain!
May e'er be bless'd the youth of noble heart,
Who brought my Merah to these arms again!
But oh!  my child, how long canst thou remain?
This knight being gone, who next may thee befriend?
Thy aged sire cannot the strife maintain,
His feeble arm no more the spear can send&mdash;
O!  where thy own dear lord?  he could thee too befriend.

As you, brave knight, he has a gen'rous mind;
Sure never shall my soul forget the day,
When I my Merah saw to woe resign'd,
Without one hope that could it aught allay!
My aged heart, through grief, did melt away&mdash;
But I shall, worthy knight, the tale thee tell
With pity sure affect thy breast it may
For pity with the hero brave doth dwell;&mdash;
He's but a coward at heart, whoe'er may it repel.

"The strife's begun, &mdash; three knights lie on the field,&mdash;
They've fall'n, Carmiline, beneath thy hand;
And none durst now the spear against thee wield,&mdash;
Methinks, I see thee in thy anger stand,
And hear thee make aloud thy proud demand&mdash;
You, Merah, fling to heaven your weeping eye&mdash;
My soul cannot the killing sight withstand;
In all my age I run &mdash; for arms I cry,
And wish, a thousand times, the days that have gone by.

"So felt my soul, great knight, upon that day
When Carmiline would bear this maid from me;
He and his chiefs did mix in bloody fray,
They for my Merah else could not agree;
And none should have the maiden fair but he,
Who, in the strife, all others would excel;
Yet she could not, as wedded maiden, be&mdash;
And yet, for his embrace, must with him dwell,
In glorious, sure, his death who in such contest fell!

"The knights of Brydain only do contend,
They who, of late, my native land o'ercame&mdash;
Then is it the proud victor's right to send,
Among the vanquish'd few, dishonour, shame?
Did ever noble victor make the claim?
No, &mdash; nor the brave of Brydain it demand,&mdash;
'Tis but the base, unworthy Brydain's fame,
The coward, who durst not hero's sight withstand,
That would dishonour, shame, bring on a vanquish'd land.

"To me but one sad hope alone they gave,
And soon, alas!  that hope is banish'd quite&mdash;
It was, if I could find a knight so brave,
Among my own, as could share in the fight,
That they the maid to him would yield if right:
But in his country's wars my son did die,
And well they knew I could not find a knight&mdash;
In all my age I run, for arms I cry,
And wish a thousand times the days that have gone by.

"A spear I seize, but can't, alas, it send!
Weak is that arm so strong in youthful days;
Then hope is o'er &mdash; to earth I lowly bend,
And thus, in tears, my voice to heaven upraise:
'Oh, power divine!  be ever bless'd thy ways!
It is thy will that I should know this pain,
That Carmiline should on my Merah seize,
And's not for me, thee, heaven, to arraign,
But patient still to bear what you, high throne, ordain!'

"Thus what great heaven willed I patient bore;
But now more proud than yet is Carmiline:
Along the field he sends his threatening roar,
And cries, 'who will dispute the maiden mine?
But yield, ye brave, and me the fair resign;
The time, that ye can have her, soon may come;
When those bright eyes will lose that ray divine,
And that fair cheek through age will cease to bloom,
For her, no knight, this arm shall send to the cold tomb,'

He says, and moves to where doth Merah stand,&mdash;
For hope I look, &mdash; my friends lurk from the field,
And I'm alone &mdash; I seize her senseless hand,
And thus do boldly speak as I her yield.
'Go, my own dear child, heavens will thee shield,
He, who sees all, shall keep thy soul from ill;
Against the foe thy sire the spear can't wield,
But, gracious heaven, this is all thy will,&mdash;
Then go, my own dear Merah, and be virtuous still.

"'What though you now join in the vicious state,
Heaven who knows how thou art pure and mild,
Will teach thee, even still, maid, to be great,&mdash;
Yes, heaven can ever look upon my child;
Black sin, I see already stare thee wild,
And ev'ry vice that brings chaste bosom ill,
But I too see thy soul yet undefiled,&mdash;
Nought has disturb'd thy pare, thy constant will&mdash;
Then go, my own dear Merah can be virtuous still.'

"I pause &mdash; her looks are wildly on me fix'd&mdash;
To her base hearted Carmiline doth speak;
His cruel word with bitter soothing's mix'd,
And her fair arm to kiss he would uptake,&mdash;
But ere he can, he must the maid forsake&mdash;
Behind the herald's trumpet loud 'gan blow,
And on the plain's a youth of noble make&mdash;
High 'bove in air the wind his plumes doth throw,
And bright his arms of steel, &mdash; methinks I see him now.

"Come with the knights of Brydain too was he,
But since the fight apart he stood from all;
And seem'd a knight yet young in arms to be&mdash;
Slender in make, as Carmiline as tall&mdash;
Loudly his voice doth for the battle call;&mdash;
'Come, Carmiline, come to the strife,' he cries, 
'And send to the cold tomb a knight withal;
That ray divine still's in the maiden's eyes,
And still the bloom unfaded on her fair cheek lies.

"'And let them, maid 'tis not for me to seek
Whate'er may dim that lovely look of thine;
Long may the bloom be fair upon that cheek,
And long that eye in all its beauty shine!
And should, O maid!  the victory be mine,
Proud Carmiline shall not obtain his will;
Thee to thy sire unblemish'd I'll resign,
Where nought may offer thy chaste bosom ill,
But where his own dear Merah can be virtuous still.'

"He said, and Carmiline call'd to the fight,&mdash;
My friends return &mdash; my fall'n soul doth rise&mdash;
We shout &mdash; we praise &mdash; we bless the youthful knight,
And all around re-echoes to our cries:
As when dark clouds o'erspread autumnal skies,
As round a field mature the reapers throng,
Their hearts are low, they cheerless lift their eyes,&mdash;
Till Phoebus coming wakens hope ere long,
And all the fields resound with praise and grateful song.

"So rais'd our hopes, and echo'd all around:
Proud Carmiline has nothing in reply;
His heavy mail more fast he on him bound,
And sullen moved, his spear uplifted high;&mdash;
Fearless the youthful knight is drawing nigh,
And now, when each as near as meet arrives,
At once their lengthen'd spears together fly,
And strike in air, &mdash; our knight's the other drives,
And tops its foe's proud casque, and it of crest deprives.

"Our eager shout swift for the youth ascends&mdash;
They hasty met &mdash; their shining swords they drew&mdash;
And soon, by turns, 'neath heavy blow each bends&mdash;
The angry points have pierc'd their armour through&mdash;
But now, proud Carmiline, what canst thou do?
Thy step is yielding backward on the green&mdash;
Nor more aloft thy wrathful arm we view;
Beneath the blow it bends &mdash; thy danger's seen&mdash;
But thee yet fate preserves &mdash; the knights do rush between.

"Our joy is great, the knight we loudly cheer
O never shall my soul forget that day!
None durst advance with shout or threatening spear,
In silence all slunk from the field away:
Ten days the knight consents with us to stay
He asks my virtuous Merah to his bride&mdash;
I grant the blooming maid without delay&mdash;
But he should first some days away abide,
Should go to seek his sire, that far off did reside.

"But many days, alas!  have since gone by,
And yet no tidings of the knight have we;
Hard fate perhaps did evil on mm try,
Nor more we may the youth of Brydain see;
If so, what, Merah, shall become of thee,
Who but in weeping canst the hero name?
With him alone thy soul can happy be,
Yet what if fate denies thee, maid, thy claim,
And thou art ne'er to see young Harnol, knight of fame?"

The Sire has ended scarce, when in the hall,
Where he the while the tender tale did tell,
A maid appeared, till then unseen by all,
Tho', since the knight came in, she there did dwell.
Her looks were sad, and 'fore them all she fell,
And loudly cried, "will ye, as heaven, forgive
A sinful maid, that did 'gainst both rebel?
'Tis I who in the grove at hand do live,
And I it is who cause ye all this night to grieve."

She said, and all Sisserah b'lieve to know,
Yet scarcely can, so chang'd she now appears;
Her look no more doth leer seductive show.
But beauty to itself unknown it bears&mdash;
Such as the look of virtue only wears&mdash;
O heavenly beauty!  beauty without art!
Such to itself the soul of all endears;
Tho' other charms low souls may lead apart,
'Tis virtue's look alone can touch the noble heart.

Sisserah in such loveliness is seen&mdash;
Yes, heaven's purest light within her glows,
By Lucan's greatness touched her soul has been,
And now how lovely virtue is well knows;
Before her breast had never felt repose.
But there now purest peace doth make abode&mdash;
O great, thou art, fair maid, and great are those,
Who shun, like you, the evil ways they've trod,
To know what virtue is, what heaven, what their god!

At once they all the weeping maid forgave,
And thus she 'gins to tell without delay:
"'Tis I," she cries, "who Harnol, knight so brave.
Have caus'd far from his Merah long to stay;
For I him letter sent upon that day,
(As though his constant Merah had it sent)
When from this tower he went to far assay;
For him reproach, and foul dislike it meant,
And did him, from returning here again, prevent.

"And, Merah, I thee ever envy bore:
To him who knew thee not I would thee paint,
As sinful maiden, this a hated tower,
That could the breast of virtue even taint.
When, Lucan, you first heard this night my plaint,
I grieved to see the knights that were herein,
And that pure love I seeming had was faint;
For in this breast did ever habit sin,
And where that is pure love may never enter in.

"Nor, Lucan, is thy love to thee untrue,
For nought could ever change her soul divine;
From Carmol her brave Harnol rescued too,
As, Merah, you he did from Carmiline;
And I am told that she doth grieve and pine,
And fate, to search thee, knight, has far her driven&mdash;
Now ye all know how great a fault is mine,
Yet pardon'd I do feel my soul by heaven,
And am I too by you?"  they all exclaim, &mdash; "forgiv'n!"

