TO ZAIRAH.
O thou who e'er amid my troubled night,
Comest in all thy grieving to my view,&mdash;
Sad one, for whom my soul has, in despite
Of fate and cruel absence, e'er been true!
Share in whatever to thy bard is due&mdash;
Yes, ZAIRAH, if the son of future days,
When I, dear girl, no more can sing of you,
Should deign unto my song the meed of praise,
Oh let him share with thee, whose smile that song could raise!

But ZAIRAH, my love, now long it is since we
Have known that bliss which e'er those lovers know,
Who, near each other's arms, are bless'd to be,
Without, for once, the hap'ness to forego.
Long 'tis since then; &mdash; but since did ever glow
Thy bosom, with what bids a soul to change?
Absence might make thee to forget me so;
But absence never can, my love, how strange!
Make me forget my ZAIRAH wheresoe'er I range!

And tho' of Lucan's constant love I sing,
Tho' paint, of Dinah fair, the charms, it's true;
'Tis ZAIRAH, thou, who such to mind dost bring,
For all that's fair in her I've seen in you.
Then wilt thou hear what did the maid go through,
What ways, to search her Lucan, did she rove?
And still, what ills her Lucan did pursue?
Lucan, who too to find his Dinah strove&mdash;
Sad is their tender tale!  vouchsafe to hear, my love.

CANTO FIRST.
Lone even now, with all her 'custom'd train,
Of moons, and clouds, and gath'ring element,
Doth o'er the hills, remote from heaven, lean,
Looking on all beneath with dreariment;
And nature reigns o'er ev'ry plain content:
The weari'd stag, to far off covert goes;
And the sad bird, that nightly doth lament,
Now grieving in the silent shade uprose,
Invoking all the vales to echo round her woes.

When all alone, the hapless Dinah came
On through the silent vale of Marlingate,
Where still, her weari'd ghost doth nightly claim
Sad lovers to the story of her fate.
Beside, if true what ancient tales relate,
Lucan himself doth with the maid appear,
Array'd in all his pride of martial state,
And chiefs, and knights, his old companions, near,
Whose gallant deeds, like his, lie hid since many a year.

In hand a pointless spear she loosely held&mdash;
And low her back adown a quiver slung;
But far, far hence, had been its shafts impell'd,
That long did lie her needless bow unstrung:
And great the dangers she had been among,
As each dejected look too plainly told;
His head her gentle palfrey downward hung,
And she no more than could the rein uphold:
Sad prospect, in such case, fair maiden to behold!

For, fairer maid was ne'er in Erin-land;
Nor braver knight than hers could any see.
The youth, when late to war, did give his hand,
As dearest pledge of latest constancy:
But war was now all o'er, the time when he,
If death, or other ill, had not delay'd,
Was in th' embraces of his love to be,
And vows, erewhile in sight of heaven made,
Be sanction'd on that shrine to which doth Hymen lead.

Wherefore, for now she nothing of him heard,
Killarney's bower sadly would she stray,
Killarney, fairest vale whom nature rear'd,
Where blooming verdure holds eternal sway;
And ancient hill, high up as god of day,
And stately tree, too ever rearing high,
Do o'er the meads around their heads display;
While ever murmuring goes fair streamlet nigh,
And one ag'd lake, the fairest lake beneath the sky.

But some may guess this Tempe vale I ween,&mdash;
Fair Tempe where the gods would come of old;
Yet only Erin-land can boast the scene,
For there mine eyes the wonder did behold&mdash;
If there what's lovely be as wonder told&mdash;
Where loveliness her court doth ever keep,
And freedom, too, did once a temple hold;
But now, for rights, that long in secret sleep,
Her val'ant sons, but o'er its hallow'd ruins, weep!

Then far from all would Dinah wander here,&mdash;
Here would in secret for her Lucan grieve&mdash;
But lo!  the knights of Carmol do appear&mdash;
Of Carmol, &mdash; he whose dark soul could deceive.
What youth, O maid thee rushes to relieve?
But does he fail?  for him thy woes seem great,&mdash;
And who but he, Killarney could retrieve?
For here no Lucan doth thy coming wait,&mdash;
He's far from his own vale, from you, lone Marlingate.

Then why, fair maiden, thus distracted view?
And why those tears, that from thine eyes do start?
Away the thoughts that can but such renew&mdash;
What 'vails it now to wake thy bitter smart?
But no &mdash; weep on &mdash; O weep!  for proud thy part:
Thou weepest thy ruin'd land; thy knight a slave,
And cursed be they, whose more than cruel heart
Can smile on such &mdash; who can from weeping leave,
B'lieving their knight in chains, their native land a grave.

And Lucan, well thou meritest her tears:
Great art thou in the strife of victory,
When chief thou risest 'midst a thousand spears;
And greater, if in chains for liberty:&mdash;
All hail!  then, gallant youth of soul thus free
For thee fair maiden well may wake her woe:
But who, young hero, would not do like thee&mdash;
Who'd prove, out to his native land a foe&mdash;
For him, no maid should grieve, for him, no tears should flow!

And Dinah doth again distracted gaze;
And from her eyes again the tears do start;
That soon the vale she quits &mdash; no more she stays
Where every scene, thus off'ring, strikes her heart,
And brings to her sad soul the heavier part
Of many a woe:  for woe it is to see
One's native plains, when only they impart
The thought of what was once felicity,
And what again, alas!  must never &mdash; never be.

This the last night, the mournful maiden cried,
As onward now she sadly grieving went,
This the last night &mdash; no more I'll here abide&mdash;
Farewell ye shades, where happier days were spent!
Farewell, farewell, since heav'n has nothing sent:
O!  fain would Dinah ever with you dwell;
But all do now but sorrows represent&mdash;
And all do now but cruel anguish tell&mdash;
Ye shades, where happier days were spent, farewell, farewell.

If chance, some other maid of future day,
Should here begin to love, as I've begun,
O thou, lone spirit, of these shades!  then say
How true the ways of love has Dinah run&mdash;
Tell her 'tis hard to do as I have done&mdash;
In fine, thus let my woeful tale appear:
How loving, I did never love but one&mdash;
How grieving, I did waste my tender year&mdash;
And sighing, perhaps to heaven, she'll give for me a tear.

Or if my knight &mdash; but he'll ne'er here return,
And soon these plains shall fall 'neath tyrant's sway,
Which we, alas!  as soon shall cease to mourn,
Depriv'd of life with them in youthful day&mdash;
But if it be allow'd (and sure it may,)
That ghosts can quit where death his prison deigns,
Then Lucan, we will burst the mould'ring clay,
And in despite of foeman's cruel chains,
Meet here once more, and guard, in death, our native plains.

Then warble on, thou lonely bird of night!
For ever thus, thy wild and doleful strain;
In other days such could my soul delight,
And such in death yet may delight again&mdash;
But lo!  what voice &mdash; who doth with thee complain;
For near the borders of you dismal mound,
Some maid, methinks, her nightly walk doth deign;
For there, the lonesome waste, for far around,
Wakes with Ruennah oft, &mdash; in truth an awful sound.

Some hapless maid, who thus amid the night
Forth comes like me, to search her Lucan dear;
And from the summit of yon distant height,
Thus sends her voice abroad, that he may hear;
But thou hast ceased, nor doth thy love appear;
And, oh!  what anguish must thy bosom fill!
With thee to grieve, then shall I thither steer?
But what new sound?  ah, 'tis the distant hill,
That doth for all around, echo Ruennah still!

Ere now, the moon was high in heavens crown'd,
And all the stars as wont at midnight shone,
Save Dinah's star, &mdash; alone that darkling frown'd,
And lent no ray to guide the friendless on;
It's brighter beams are all to chaos gone,&mdash;
Such beams, as smil'd upon her happier day.
Ere cruel fate, with wrath, had look'd upon
Her own dear land, and forc'd her love away,
To rescue native rights, and humble foreign sway!

Then hard, nay cruel, art thou destiny:
If aught to loving tenderness were due;
If beauty, such as heav'n might deign to see,
From heaven, e'er yet, of tender pity drew;
Then Dinah, ev'ry star should smile on you;
Should ever see you feel and hope the best:
E'en angels should from highest pitying view,
To lend thee aid, if ought of ill oppress'd,
Such beauty in thy form, such pity in thy breast.

The awful hour, the mid of night, is pass'd;
And sudden dreariment does heaven shroud;
By turns is heard the shrill and sudden blast,
Forth bursting from the bosom of dark cloud;
By turns some lone, some far off stream, that flow'd,
Toward its own vale, adown the mountain' side,
On whose dark heath no star from heaven glow'd,
The sad and wearied traveller to guide,
Who, distant from his plains, now wanders far and wide.

This by her seen, more heavily she sigh'd;
And now despair 'gan cause her cruel smart.
On through dark lonely ways she slowly hied
With looks cast down, and sorrowful at heart;
And oft those looks, she angry throws apart,
And oft to heav'n, &mdash; but heaven could not see&mdash;
Ah no! &mdash; too good, too kind, thou ever art&mdash;
To look for, once, without thy clemency,
On her, who even then, look'd angry up to thee!

Yes, 'twas thy good, thy ever glorious light
That beam'd now, heav'n, benignant on her mind,
And show'd her how to form her thoughts aright,
And how, mid woes on earth, some peace to find:
Oh 'twas not vain!  she calls thee more than kind.
Ah, happy!  who thus own thy clemency&mdash;
But oh, how hard!  how destitute!  how blind!
Who would, great heaven!  from thy favours flee,
Or cast, for wrongs e'er felt, one angry look on thee!

The clouds have pass'd, the moon is up again,
And ev'ry star looks forth in brighter ray;
The nightly bird, e'en too, renews her strain,
And sends, in tender song, the hours away:
Sure never look'd old night more pleased, more gay;
E'en Dinah too, tho' saddest, now seems pleased&mdash;
But lo!  a sudden cause of strange dismay&mdash;
Afar she hears a song of pity raised&mdash;
Then sees more nigh some one on whom the moon bright gaz'd.

A thousand thoughts her trembling soul possess:
Alone I am &mdash; perhaps so base he be&mdash;
But no, sad maid, thy fearful thoughts suppress,&mdash;
Sure none could look with base intent on thee:
Thy heav'nly eyes beam love and chastity,&mdash;
Such love as but to noble thought gives place:
Beside, is there so void of e'en pity
One breast as gentle maiden to disgrace?&mdash;
If so, how void of soul!  how frail!  how mean!  how base!

But lo!  the moon's again in darkness lost,
And gath'ring clouds swift sail along the sky,
Nor more, the sounds of grief her ear accost,
Nor more, the sight of aught attracts her eye&mdash;
By this, however, she believeth nigh,
Him whom she had, but late, not far descried;
And now she stops, and now she hears him sigh;
Then suddenly, as Mars, when in his pride,
All close at hand a stranger warrior she spied.

At once he stopt, and as one list'ning stood,
When doth he, from its place, his sword swift take;
And oft, he it half raised, as tho' he would
Therewith a search, for all around him, make.
Meanwhile, doth Dinah, in her soul, thus speak:
First come, O Death!  let heaven have it so&mdash;
Dinah live, her honour is at stake;
And it to save, e'en life I shall forego&mdash;
She said, and seized her spear &mdash; he seemed a foreign foe.

Wonder, ye maids!  who honour never own
To have the power such greatness to awake&mdash;
Yes, wonder, ye!  if here fair maid is shown
To hazard all, &mdash; e'en life, &mdash; for its dear sake&mdash;
But mark what part herein doth heaven take,&mdash;
(O heaven ever guards the virtuous fair!)
Just when the pointless spear she raised to make
One doubtful throw amid the darken'd air,
The knight pass'd on unseen, &mdash; she knew not how or where.

Her soul, howe'er, yet fears not all is past&mdash;
For once, the glaring moon looks as before&mdash;
And now, a look behind she fearful cast,
And saw the knight a distant plain go o'er:
The sight she lov'd &mdash; his sword still rais'd he bore;
On it the moon, as fearful, trembling shone&mdash;
Again she looks &mdash; he's lost, he's seen no more;
And with him now being all her terror gone,
She gladly, with her lonely palfrey, journeys on.

As some fair vale, on summer's day o'erhung,
By stormy clouds, heaven's great aerial fleet,
Sees darkness range her pleasant bow'rs among,
And all her oaks bend down the shock to greet;
But if far-faring winds the squadron meet,
Them, straightway, do they lead to other skies;
And soon the vale, escap'd such ruin great,
All joyous seemeth &mdash; fair her oaks uprise,
And light through pleasant bow'r, in place of darkness, hies.

So glad the maid t' have 'scap'd impending ill;
But now, not farther on her way, she goes,
When just close near, and near the distant hill,
Again the tender song of pity rose.
Sweet was the strain, as ever strain of woes;
Of griefs it seem'd to tell &mdash; such as possess
The soul whence ever bitter anguish flows,
Without one hope to even have it less,
But e'er to 'bide in such &mdash; Oh height of wretchedness!

"Sad is the song of grieving in the night,"
Then Dinah said, touch'd with the mournful tale!
In truth, ag'd bard, thou seemest in sad plight,
A friendless here, far from thy native vale,
Assail'd by all which may the sad assail,
If I guess right. &mdash; Oh fate less hard thy hand,
When half thy ills o'er half the world prevail,
Than when thou doest but one alone command
T' oppress the friendless distant from his native land.

By this, unseen, nigh to the bard she drew,&mdash;
No more doth coming ill her soul presage;
But where the sound at once her eyes she threw,
And him she 'spies near lowly hermitage&mdash;
But sudden starts, &mdash; for in that look of age
Something she saw &mdash; around her soul it clung
As nature's self. &mdash; He's silent &mdash; thoughts engage
His troubl'd mind, &mdash; now oft his hands he wrung
As in despair-now as in hope, his eyes upflung.

And, Dinah, what meanwhile thy ruling thought?
O great!  worthy the fairest of her kind!
Whene'er his soul, with heavy grief, seem'd fraught,
Then grief, through thine, did too a passage find;
And when he glad, then gladness fill'd thy mind:
Than this, fair maid, what better to attest,
That thou of greatness hast a sense refin'd?
For what of ev'ry noble soul the best?
To feel the joy or sorrow of another's breast.

Now towards the bard the maid as joyful goes;
No dread is hers; &mdash; "how mild the look," she cries,
"Of him who is not of our country's foes!&mdash;
Who is not come from Brydain's land, which tries
How all to ruin here" &mdash; she says, &mdash; but flies
Sudden apart, &mdash; for one of Brydain's land
She now beholds the bard &mdash; He quick espies
Her, as she sought a thicket close at hand,
And follows straight, as tho' perforce to make her stand.

What can the maid? &mdash; her wearied palfrey fails,
And from her grasp down falls the pointless spear,
And now the bard is just at hand &mdash; he hails
The frighted wanderer &mdash; at first, her ear
Believes from him the threat of death to hear&mdash;
But 'tis not so &mdash; he cheers the troubled maid,
And soon her soul doth banish ev'ry fear&mdash;
The ag'd did follow but to lend his aid,
T' allay the woes that lie saw in her looks display'd.

Hard by, quoth he, there is a dwelling lone;
On thee, to thither hie, may I prevail?
Not here, hath heaven better me bestown;
For far the dwelling of my native vale.
Then come, and though no costly wines regale,
Though pompous show doth not with me reside,
You'll find, perhaps, what better may avail&mdash;
'Tis how with patience evils to abide;
For Heaven hath lent me that, tho' fortune hath denied.

Thither, with heart of hope, she with him goes;
It was but where she saw him just before:
Behind an ancient yew all lonely rose;
In front a winding stream his wanderings bore;
And all the roof with moss was cover'd o'er,
And all the ground about with leaves was spread.
The bard now opens to the maid the door;
She enters, and the moon too entrance made,
Her brightsome beams of other light serving instead.

You find, young maid, no doubt, fortune too hard;
O where the breast, that doth her not so find!
This aged breast, at least, exclaim'd the bard,
Can call you, heavenly maiden, too unkind&mdash;
My son, my hope, distracted in his mind&mdash;
O where thy strength &mdash; thy valour &mdash; greatness &mdash; where?
Hast thou all lost?  or hast thou grown so blind?
Or through the weight of heaviness or care,
That thou would'st rush to self-destruction through despair?

This night, young maid, this night that's not yet pass'd,
I sat me down behind yon ancient tree;
The moon, as now, her light around me cast,
And all was silent, as it now may be;
Nought living did I hear, nought living see,
Until my Harnol came in silence by;
My hero held his sword as carelessly;
Howe'er, around he throws his watchful eye;
And oft to heaven a look he sends, and oft a sigh!

So did he long, nor me the while he saw&mdash;
But now, the fire of wrath comes from his eyes;
The sword he trembling towards his breast doth draw,
Nor more he looks to heaven, nor more he sighs.
I hasty rush &mdash; he hears my frantic cries&mdash;
The sword all trembling, from his grasp down fell
A dagger, which he has, its place supplies&mdash;
I stop his arm &mdash; I beg him straight to tell
What evils, what misfortunes, have him late befell.

He answers not &mdash; he trembles &mdash; he would run&mdash;
I clasp him in my arms &mdash; I wildly cry,
Would'st thou, my Harnol dear, would'st thou, my son,
Thy sire thus ruin, of ev'ry bliss deny?
Thou would'st, if thou to wild destruction fly.&mdash;
At this I cease, &mdash; on me his looks are mild,&mdash;
He sees the tear gush from my aged eye,&mdash;
He clasps me in his arms &mdash; he cries thy child
Shall not thee ruin, in rushing to destruction wild.

Before my step, he hither homeward went;
I follow after, weeping forth my joy;
My Harnol will, I cry, for all repent,
Nor will he more, his father's peace destroy.
Such thoughts alone, dear maid, my mind employ,&mdash;
My fears, my sorrows, all I left behind.
I enter in &mdash; but where my darling boy?
He is not here &mdash; I rush &mdash; I no where find,&mdash;
Then can't this breast, at least, call fortune too unkind?

Oft have I wander'd here since youthful days,
And no such ill as this, did me befall;
Oft since Bourdin, who on my love did seize,
Beneath this arm upon the coast did fall.
But why the days of youthful deeds recall?
O why the time, when Constah, maiden true,
Gave to my arms two infants bleeding all!
And one was, Bolden, lost, brave friend, with you,
And one was lost this night, &mdash; O maid what shall I do!

At this he wept, at this his hands he wrung&mdash;
But sudden ceasing, NO, &mdash; he boldly cried,
And straight his manly looks to heaven upflung,
As one who all the pow'rs of heaven defied&mdash;
Yet no &mdash; his hope, his soul on heaven relied,
But 'neath him, he doth deem it to condole;
And should'st thou now, hard fortune, in thy pride,
Come, and thy dreadest ills before thee roll&mdash;
Thou could'st not, even then, shake Harmond's steadfast soul!

Then cries the maid, "sad is thy tale, O bard!
But art thou sure, the crime so very great,
Which we, when cruel fortune presses hard,
Sometimes commit our woes to terminate?
If so, then I, sad maid, in what a state!
But heaven forgave me when I would the deed;
I heard it loud my trembling soul intreat&mdash;
Nor was it vain &mdash; I rais'd my voice with speed,
And prais'd thee, heav'n, t' have look'd upon me in such need."

And cried the bard, could ever maiden deign
An action to commit, so vile, so base;
O!  should, at least, the virtuous refrain
From that which e'en the meanest can disgrace!
But you had woes, and to them you gave place!
O!  where the breast so strong but might so do!
But you had, maiden, too, of heaven's grace&mdash;
You felt it, and hence own'd what by you due;
O thus it is, kind heaven!  that all should act with you!

But what, O maid!  could urge you to commit
So base a crime? &mdash; "O father!  it was woe&mdash;
Nor other woe, sure in the world, but it,
Could make me, heaven, to forget thee so!&mdash;
My Lucan went to fight his country's foe&mdash;
The wars are o'er, yet he doth not return&mdash;
Proud Carmol comes &mdash; he doth my sire o'erthrow&mdash;
From his embrace, by one brave youth I'm torn,
And 'scape to search my knight upon the world forlorn!

Long now I've search'd, and long I've search'd in vain.
My hero is, I know, in foeman's chains,&mdash;
There are who say, he is in battle slain,&mdash;
Behold, O bard!  at best, how great my pains!
In slav'ry then, my country e'er remains;
For who, but Lucan, could my country free?
And this is what my sinful soul constrains
To do what heaven is ever shock'd to see&mdash;
O!  teach me, holy sire, t' avoid th' impiety!

The bard would speak &mdash; but now, just nigh, he hears
The foot of one that wandered toward the cell&mdash;
Sweet hope, he cries, my aged bosom cheers&mdash;
'Tis Harnol comes &mdash; O maiden, all is well&mdash;
Thus scarcely had he said, when, strange to tell
Three nights, in Carmol's name, on Dinah seize.&mdash;
The aged Harmond would the foe repel&mdash;
His trembling grasp on Dinah's spear he lays,
Recalling to his soul the deeds of younger days.

Abroad they are &mdash; the moon looks on the fight&mdash;
The aged Harmond, with his spear, o'erthrew
That foe who had the first opposed his might,
And from his grasp the trembling Dinah drew&mdash;
But now what can the aged hero do?
The moon quick hides her from a sight so dread&mdash;
And 'gain the bloody contest doth renew&mdash;
A stranger knight does round him terror spread&mdash;
'Tis Harnol, whom, from far, the shouts have hither led.

Ag'd Harmond knows his son's brave sword in fight,
And all the transport of his soul arose;
Swift now, ye cowards, swift, he cries, to flight,
Weak is your strength against my Harnol's blows,&mdash;
Why, fearful moon, not now your light expose?
O could I see how doth his sword destroy!
Hold to, my son; weak, trembling, are thy foes&mdash;
But just the cause which doth thy arms employ&mdash;
Hold to, &mdash; they fall &mdash; they yield &mdash; well done, my gallant boy!

