'Tis 'bout the mid of night, lone, solemn hour,
When silence is o'er all the world around,
And every aged hill, and wood, and tower,
Look bright beneath the moon, high 'bove them crown'd,
'Mid all the stillness of the heavens profound.
And now is far off heard the river's fall,
As breaking thro' the night with awful sound,
Which echo lone as often doth recal,
And send among the silent hills and valleys all.

And now the hour when Bandon's brother bold,
Architon named, clad in his arms all bright,
Alone upon the plain his way doth hold,
As tho' resolved on purpose high to-night&mdash;
Nor less it is; he would go meet the might
Of Carmol and his gloomy people strong;
For so did Harmond, aged bard, delight,
And win to love of fame still by his song,
That he, and e'en Bandon are filled with it ere long.

But neither Bandon nor the bard has known
The purpose high which sways Architon's heart,
And little guess it is to seek alone
The meed of Carmol's fall he doth depart&mdash;
But, warrior, stay, too proud of soul thou art&mdash;
Leave for the greatest knight such mighty deed,
And turn to seek thy fame in other part&mdash;
But why thus for the venturous soul aread?
Architon too has fame, then may the hero speed.

Meanwhile do Bandon and ag'd Harmond bide
Nigh fair Limercus, till they Harnol see,
Who, when with Dinah late went wandering wide,
Till he might Lucan find, her sire to free,
Did promise there, by this, with them to be:
But long in vain they wait the knight's return,
That 'gin they think some evil found has he,
And Bandon now, so fame his breast does burn,
Oft begs he may in quest of him and Dinah journ.

And so that aged bard, at length, agreed.
And they now hasten from Limercus fair,
Elsewhere in quest of Harnol to proceed,
And Dinah, who did journey with him bear.
And many lonely parts they travel, where
No tidings of the wanderers they find,
Nor ever meet, the while, adventure rare,
That Bandon is right saddened in his mind,
And often fortune calls all cruel and unkind.

And oft he cries he secretly will take
Vengeance on those who wrought his country's fall,
Nor does he think hence honour to forsake,
Or that great heaven for vengeance too may call.
And such doth virtuous Harmond's breast appal,
That oft he tells him of high heaven's decree,
Which censures secret vengeance ta'en on all,
And, even tho' in fault th' aggressor be,
It 'vaileth not &mdash; just heav'n shall all still vengeful see.

But ill does Bandon now such counsel heed,
Which sorely doth the breast of Harmond grieve;
And, as they on their way do still proceed,
He often thinks how he may him retrieve
From fallen state, and noble notion give&mdash;
But how may he?  Bandon will only hear
Of knights who did of old great feats achieve,
Or maidens, who, in wandering every where,
To search their loves, did often meet adventures rare.

But even such it is will Harmond tell;
And Bandon ever willing hears his lays;
For he a happy bard who knew full well
To sing of that which, while the soul 'twould please,
Should, too, it high to noble purpose raise&mdash;
Oh ye!  who tune for other end your lyre,
Know 'tis at best a thoughtless few to seize,
That were apt moral breathes not o'er th' entire,
That song, which else might serve and please, can then but tire.

And now soon do they come by where ruined tower
Stood in its solemn state of early years.
And once, it seemed, dwelt there great lord of power,
But, save the owl, now there nought dwelling bears.
And all the trace of age and ruin wears:
'Bove on its top the aged moss thick grew;
And high along the walls the ivy rears,
While birds of prey within and 'bout it flew,
And o'er the silence, ever there, shrill screamings threw.

And close behind there stood an ancient grove,
Where mossy oak and blasted fir reared high,
And winding stream did ever grieving rove,
As o'er ag'd crags and roots it way did try;
And here the screaming owl too e'er did fly,
As tho' well pleas'd the mournful wave to hear,
Or she did think that gloomy night was nigh,
So overhead the trees their branches bear,
And hide from all below the light of heavens fair.

And while they view they see no mortal round,
As tho' none near the lonely place did dwell,
And all did b'lieve it to be fairy ground,
Where none may bide, as early legends tell;
And oft, the while, doth Harmond's bosom swell;
And in his eye oft, too, doth stand the tear,&mdash;
Which Bandon marks as soon and guesses well,
That here doth hang some tale of wonder rare,
And anxious prays the bard that he would all declare.

But often doth the aged him refuse,
As ill his soul might bear such tale to tell&mdash;
And, as he does, again the tower he views,
And 'gain his heart doth seem within to swell,
And in his eye the tear as oft to dwell,
Which ever wakes anew Bandon's desire&mdash;
But lo!  no more the bard he does compel,
All willing now he takes his tuneful lyre,
That he may tell what doth the knight of him require.

"Long pass'd was noon, and, o'er the west sea far,
Broad shone the sun, and seem'd as tho' he gave
His look to where thro' heavens all day his car,
As wont, its golden track of light did leave;
'Neath which, for all around, did beam the wave;
That fair the sight for him who sails to see;
And who on land or ocean does not crave
That such gay tide of day may last, save he,
The chief of yon lone bark, who sighs for night to be?

"Slack are his sails, nor does he wait the wind,&mdash;
To him more grateful now that cooling breeze,
Which comes when thou, fair sun, art gone behind
Thine own bright hill, far off in western seas,
For night then near, which distant yet he sees.
How oft, Menavia, doth he sail thee by!
And, too, how often where thy ancient trees
Above the noisy shore are rearing high,
Throws he, as tho' to all unseen, a searching eye!

"But yet his eye beholdeth not the maid
Who there did promise to be seen with night,&mdash;
And he till then would have his bark delay'd,
Would not have come, Menavia, in thy sight,
While it was day, lest from thy land he might
Discover'd be; &mdash; but love, which he doth know,
Has forc'd him on, though it was in despite
Of reason's self &mdash; Oh Love!  who can forego
Thy pow'r when he doth feel within thy fire to glow?

"Oft o'er this sea did sail the chief before,&mdash;
Oft came to thee, Menavia, beauteous isle,
But e'er in night his lonely bark him bore,
Else durst he not behold the maiden's smile&mdash;
But, beauty, when may not thy charms beguile?&mdash;
In darkness e'en thou madest him thy slave,
Whom proudest foe on earth might not, the while,&mdash;
 Compel one low, indignant boon to crave,
In soul so noble he, and in the fight so brave!

"Yet blush not, youth, disgrace upon thy soul
Hence does not come &mdash; he, who did never prove
The smart of what doth now within thee roll,
Did never feel, I trust, what best can move
The heart that's great, for even such doth love&mdash;
But he, whose soul yields to that beastial flame,
Which e'er is wont thro' mind that's low to rove,
May blush, indeed, for such disgrace and shame
Brings on the soul of him who would be great in fame.

"And why does Sirus, father of the maid,
Deny to him who's brave his daughter's charms,
For, who more worthy of the fair Blanaid
Than thou, Cuchullin, matchless son of arms?
But Sirus' heart is cold, nothing it warms
That noble is &mdash; he seeks the knight whose store
Gains him a name, and not who in alarms
Of war is great &mdash; O was man ever lower
Than he whose boast is wealth alone &mdash; not more?

"But Blanaid, beauteous maid, what is thy heart;&mdash;
Doest thou too think, as doth thy sordid sire?&mdash;
No, worthy maid, more great of soul thou art,
To what is high alone thou doest aspire&mdash;
Thou seekest him whom maiden would desire
That nobly thinks &mdash; oh great, oh worthy maid!
Let her, who would gain any to admire
Aught of her yet, behold th' insample laid,
It noble is to love, as thou doest love, Blanaid.

"The sun by this is gone behind the hill,
And o'er the wave the nightly breeze soon blows;
And on the rock the seabird rests, and still
Is all the shore &mdash; Cuchullin's joy arose&mdash;
His bark has moor'd, &mdash; to meet the maid he goes&mdash;
In arms his people follow close behind&mdash;
The part is gain'd where late she did propose
To meet the chief, but lost that hope of mind
Which just arose &mdash; he no where there may Blanaid find.

"And where art thou, O maid?  Cuchullin here
This night thou wert to meet &mdash; 'Come,' thou didst cry,
'Come, knight of Erin's land, Blanaid to bear
Thither with thee, &mdash; for now her sire doth try
T' espouse her to one rich in store hard by&mdash;
But poor, &mdash; but low of soul &mdash; O cruel sire!
Why doest thou so? &mdash; thou doomest me to die;
But once again I will of thee require
A happier fate &mdash; till then, young knight of fame, retire.'

"Yes, such her words &mdash; he who has hope e'er lost
Need not be told, for he can tell the best,
What now Cuchullin feels &mdash; along the coast
He wanders sad, not bearing hope the least,
But feeling all which enters in the breast
Of him who has for her he loves his fears&mdash;
His people all at distance stand oppress'd,&mdash;
Save one, that seeming is of age, who bears
His pace up toward the chief &mdash; solemn the look he wears.

"'Hear, son of youth, the voice of age, he cries,
Hear him, who, vers'd in lore of secret might,
Can call the angry spirit of the skies,
And read what hidden is from mortal sight&mdash;
All of fair Blanaid I can tell aright;&mdash;
Yonder she is in well defended tow'r,
With all her jewels, a costly store, &mdash; but, knight,
What mayest thou, &mdash; for great is Sirus' pow'r,
His knights all brave, &mdash; and he well read in magic lore?'

The aged spake, and shook his hoary head,&mdash;
He would not more, &mdash; but in his solemn look,
What would his word have told, Cuchullin read,&mdash;
Of Sirus' strength in secret art it spoke;&mdash;
Yet courage not the noble soul forsook
Of Erin's knight: &mdash; he cries, 'tho' I may scan
In thee, ag'd sire, what fearful is, yet shook
This heart ne'er yet at that which oft'nest can
The breast of proudest knight, thro' hidden pow'r, unman.'

"He said, and call'd his many knights around&mdash;
His words are few, &mdash; he tells them of the foe
Where Blanaid, and great treasure may be found,&mdash;
Then 'wakes he in their breast that martial glow,
Which they erewhile us'd feel, when wont to go
Against th' invaders of their native land&mdash;
Their spears at once they shake aloft, and show
Their eager zeal &mdash; the chief doth then command
Them to the strife &mdash; silent their way along the strand.

"As when, at close of eve, from hills afar,
Down to the pleasant mead or pasture green,
Where penn'd at night the flocks of shepherds are,
Come silent on a herd of wolves unseen&mdash;
The watchful mastiff on his guard has been&mdash;
While yet they distant are he doth them hear,
And loud he bays, that 'gins the shepherd screen
His fold at once, with what may nigh appear,
T' avoid the dreaded foe, told by his guardian near.

"So mov'd Cuchullin's people 'long the coast;
The chief is first &mdash; how great in arms is he!
Before he bears his mighty shield emboss'd
Of burnished steel &mdash; it seems e'en more to be
Than heav'n's broad moon, &mdash; for half across the sea,
Wide, in bright orb, its round is shown &mdash; a sight
Of wonder great for him who far away
Now sailing is, &mdash; he b'lieves to guess it right
Some brazen tow'r on land, beaming the moon's fair light.

"And his long spear now wond'rous to be seen!
One end he wields, and one seems in the skies,
Like to fair pine high up on mountain green,
That doth it so uprear in stately wise,
As tho' to reach the heav'ns above it tries.
When doth the wood man from below it see,
He blesses oft its form and goodly size,&mdash;
Then tells for what it best may fitted be,
Whether tall spire on land, or mast of ship on sea.

"And of bright steel his lofty helmet wrought,
'Gainst which the moon doth ever throw her beam,
As tho' for it a dwelling there she sought,
So like the blue of heav'n, where wont to gleam
Her purest ray, it then to her did seem.&mdash;
Fair too above is seen his tow'ring crest,&mdash;
And great his sword, &mdash; and strong the mail which came
For all across the hero's manly breast,
Whose high, round shoulders speak the chieftain of the rest.

"The aged man, low bent, moves on behind.
Heedless his step &mdash; now turned here, now there.
As tho' he mused much within his mind,
And of his way did take not heed or care.
One humble garb is his, else was he bare;&mdash;
Yet seems he not to care for aught the more,
And heedless oft looks to the heavens where
The silent moon her lonely way now bore,
Then mutters some strange word, and wanders as before,&mdash;

"His heedless step now turned here, now there,
And after him Cuchullin's knights come on&mdash;
Mighty they all in brazen arms appear,
With spears uprear'd, &mdash; fair sight to look upon,
While now the moon for all about them shone:
As some ag'd city, rais'd by fairy pow'r,
Shows her bright tow'rs and spires up to the sun
When he is seen in heav'n at noon-tide hour,
Bright gazing down on hill, or grove, or pleasant bower.

"So glitter'd brazen arms and lifted spears
Beneath the moon &mdash; But who the hero last&mdash;
He mighty too in all his mail appears,&mdash;
But sorrow, ever dismal maid, thou hast
Some heavy gloom over the warrior cast&mdash;
Sad is his look, &mdash; he seemeth to recall
Some once lov'd thought, some hope that now is past,
While inly grief doth him the while appal,
Ah!  who the mournful knight, the here last of all?&mdash;

"'Tis gen'rous Lay, Cuchullin's faithful squire,
He who did ever 'bide beside the chief
'Mid danger great &mdash; true, others might be nigher
In happier hour, &mdash; but when the hour of grief
Or peril came, who then would lend relief,
Who then be nigher than the faithful Lay,
That would stand close beside his lord, as if
His fate he thought his own, while far away
Would flee the friend who stood more nigh in happy day?

"But why is now the gen'rous Lay so sad?&mdash;
The hour is near when 'side his valiant lord,
He shall 'mid danger be, and will seem glad,&mdash;
Then why does aught him trouble now afford?&mdash;
But where the breast that trouble has not low'r'd&mdash;
Where he that does not know of grief one day,
For hopes long gone? &mdash; but such may be restor'd
To some one time at last &mdash; but, gen'rous Lay,
Ah!  when may he restor'd the hopes gone from thee, say?

"Yes, when may Lay accept the maid he loves&mdash;
When may fair Blanaid, she for whom his heart
Knows all the heavy anguish which it proves,
Live but for him? &mdash; Ah!  Love, indeed, thou art
Too cruel god, to fling thy burning dart
Within the breast of him so great, so true,&mdash;
Within his breast, who now would sooner part
With life itself, than claim, fair Blanaid, you,
Since doth his lord thee love &mdash; Ah soul but known to few!

"'Oh, why,' he cries, 'did Lay not erewhile know
Cuchullin's love!  then had he never thought
On thee, Blanaid, &mdash; but shall he not forego
Thought of thee now, and lose what love has wrought?
He shall, for to be great, such do he ought&mdash;
Then love, Cuchullin, love, &mdash; it far shall be
From Lay, from him whose soul thou doubtest not,
To bring mishap atween thy love and thee&mdash;
Love on, and Blaniad love, &mdash; ill will, be far from me.'

"Now had Cuchullin drawn nigh to the tow'r
Where Blanaid is &mdash; bright its broad head appears
Below the moon, and 'tis the solemn hour
When all is still, &mdash; but not so here; &mdash; he hears,
Just nigh, the foe &mdash; arms &mdash; noise of swords and spears
Preparing for the strife, &mdash; for Sirus knew
Of him at hand &mdash; alone the chief now bears
On toward the foe, &mdash; unseen to get a view
Of how they lay &mdash; meanwhile apart his people drew.

"Why does he list? &mdash; a maiden's voice he hears,
'Tis from the tow'r, &mdash; 'away, young knight,' it cries&mdash;
'Away from Blanaid's isle, if ill fate bears
Thee hither now &mdash; the demon of the skies
And foe in arms, against thee, stranger, rise,
What canst thou then, tho' didst thou never fear?
Hence swift away &mdash; leave Blanaid to her sighs,
Thou must not save her now &mdash; her sire is near,
A foe too great in power &mdash; O stranger, come not here!'

"So warn'd the voice well to the chieftain known,
'Twas Blanaid spake &mdash; but terror o'er his heart
Hence does not come &mdash; still moves he on alone
More nigh the tow'r, and gains, at length, a part,
Whence can he see, yet be unseen. &mdash; The art
Of Sirus thence he views &mdash; for all around
A wall uprear'd he has, whose top not dart
Of bow might reach, so high in heavens crown'd;
And but one entrance is, where he, himself, is found.

"In look he did as simple man appear:
Dim was his eye, and o'er his cheek were spread
Traces of age, as tho', for many a year,
Old time had there a tedious journey led,
And wrought such paths as these by constant tread
And 'bout his shoulders down did hang his hair,
And one half seem'd as gray, and one as red&mdash;
But garment he had none, save girdles drear,
And other secret things, which he did 'bout him wear.

"And there was by him in the entrance plac'd
A wheel more strange than might aught where be found,
O'er which to sing strange verse he never ceas'd,
And all the while for far did shake the ground,
And all the while the wond'rous wheel went round:&mdash;

1.
"Roll on, roll on, my mystic wheel,
For thee the desert herb I'll burn,&mdash;
Nor arms of brass, nor arms of steel
Shall gain the tow'r while thou doest turn.

2.
But none may force my wheel to cease,
None stay its pow'r while Sirus here,
For, who the elf of night can trace
Thro' all her vales, so void of fear?

3.
Nor may Cuchullin check its force,
With all his knights of battle nigh;
For he cannot the dark wood course,
Nor read the stars as well as I.

4.
Roll on, roll on, my mystic wheel,&mdash;
For thee the desert herb I'll burn,&mdash;
Nor arms of brass, nor arms of steel
Shall gain the tow'r while thou doest turn.

5.
Nor may Blanaid thy turning stay,
With all her sighs and all her tears&mdash;
O hapless maid!  now grieve you may,
In woe full soon shall roll thy years.

6.
And soon thy knight shall know his fate&mdash;
All pale before those eyes of thine,
I will him hold, or fling elate,
A mangled corse, thro' aid maligne,

7.
Roll on, roll on, my mystic wheel,
For thee the desert herb I'll burn,&mdash;
Nor arms of brass nor arms of steel
Shall gain the tow'r while thou doest turn

"So Sirus sung, while his tall knights all shone
In arms close by, and heard the awful sound,&mdash;
To them his cautious word is oft too gone,&mdash;
And still he bids his mystic wheel roll on, roll on.

"Cuchullin all has heard, and all has seen&mdash;
Dismay flies for an instant 'cross his soul:
'Oh!  why,' he cries, 'hast thou not, Sirus, been
Some hero great, then should'st thou with the whole
Of thy tall knights before Cuchullin roll&mdash;
But now too great thy pow'r &mdash; 'tis more than force
Of mortal man &mdash; but why thus in controul
Of aught am I? &mdash; were even all still worse,
Would not Cuchullin, 'void of fear, abide its course?

"'He would &mdash; then why thus show aught of dismay?
Come on, dread man!  Cuchullin's soul is high&mdash;'
He said, &mdash; and spake aloud &mdash; his people stay
Not more to hear, but hasty onward fly
To where their chief &mdash; Lay first is seen &mdash; his eye
Searches the foe, &mdash; and soon the foe is found,&mdash;
And soon is heard the clash, and soon the cry
Of thickest war, &mdash; in night a dreadful sound&mdash;
And all the while just near the awful wheel went round.

"And 'side that engine Sirus ever stands,&mdash;
But 'mid the fight his voice is often gone&mdash;
And oft his num'rous people he commands
With dreadful shout; &mdash; while ever and anon
He bids his mystic wheel roll on, roll on&mdash;
Cuchullin toward the sound directs his way;
All terrible in fight the hero shone&mdash;
And close beside him is the faithful Lay,
Whom none, amid the strife, can from the chieftain stay.

"But where that aged man, who, ere the fight,
Cuchullin told of Blanaid in the tow'r,
And of great Sirus' formidable might,
In strength of arms, and strength of magic lore;
Where he? &mdash; Now not amid the battle's roar,&mdash;
But wandering alone by mountain side,&mdash;
And gazing on the moon, and mutt'ring o'er
Strange word, as tho' he in him ever tried
T' obscure, thro' his dark pow'rs, yon lamp of heavens wide.

"Yet no, fair moon, he tries not to obscure,
Thro' his dark pow'rs, aught of thy beauteous beam&mdash;
Else does he muse &mdash; and he would now procure
Such spell as may &mdash; but ill it doth beseem
Me here to tell on what the sage doth dream,&mdash;
Go, aged, wand'ring by thy mountain side,
And let thy look a glance too upward claim&mdash;
I shall not say that thou hast in thee tried
T' obscure, thro' thy dark pow'rs, yon lamp of heavens wide.

"By this the fight is in its dreadest rage;&mdash;
Shouts after shouts tremendous rise &mdash; as when
O'er head the angry elements engage,
And roar of thunder winds along the glen.
The wild boar of the wood makes for his den;
The tow'ring eagle leaves the troubled sky,
To search the thickest shade &mdash; and guilty men,
Too, for a shade to screen them now, would fly,
As tho' the dissolution of all earth were nigh.

"But where Cuchullin now? &mdash; 'mid in the field
The warrior is. &mdash; Behind his people move,
Nor few their deeds &mdash; the foe now to them yield,
And now come furious on, as tho' they strove
At once to win &mdash; meanwhile in heavens above
The moon doth change, &mdash; 'mid fire she now seems crown'd&mdash;
And now 'neath gloomy cloud doth darkling rove,
When sudden stillness comes, &mdash; save where the sound
Of that dread wheel is heard, which all the while goes round.

"And thither still Cuchullin forces way;&mdash;
But round him gather numerous his foes,&mdash;
Yet does he onward gain; &mdash; but, warrior, stay&mdash;
What wouldst thou in thy wrath? &mdash; that man oppose,
That man, to whom e'en face of heaven shows
'Bedience at times &mdash; Oh!  doest thou, chief, not hear
That awful sound where his dread engine goes?
It bids the soul of mortal man to fear&mdash;
E'en o'er it heaven is dark &mdash; Oh knight!  approach not near.

"But what may stay the man from venturous deed,
Whose noble soul with life would sooner part,
Than live and see that one he lov'd to bleed,
Thro' anguish, 'neath some one of cruel heart?
He heedeth not the threat of mystic art,
Or aught beside which doth a dwelling find
Within the breast where fear can dread impart&mdash;
And who so lost to thought of noble kind,
That would not be like him &mdash; thus proud, thus great of mind?

"Then move on, warrior, against thy foe,
Since it is great that thou shouldst peril share
For Blanaid's sake &mdash; the maid belov'd &mdash; but lo!
The throng is now already pass'd, and there
Thou art, great warrior, at last &mdash; art where
Is seen go round dread Sirus' awful wheel&mdash;
Oh where the one that does not b'lieve thee near
Thy doom at last &mdash; thou rushest in thy steel&mdash;
A shriek comes from the tow'r &mdash; thy people terror feel&mdash;"

Here paused the bard &mdash; for now they sudden hear
The plaint of one who drew high were they were,
And soon the mourner did to them appear&mdash;
Fair maid it was, who seemed great woe to share;
And by her side a bard his step did bear,
Who never ceas'd her bosom to relieve&mdash;
One time by tender tale, to banish care&mdash;
One time by counsel wise, just thought to give,
But all may not avail, for still the maid did grieve.

They now have joined, and Harmond first doth hail:
"Whence is the aged bard of song," he cried&mdash;
"And whence the maid?  but why would she conceal
From me her look?"  at once he ceas'd and sigh'd
Within him deep &mdash; he knows who now would hide
From him her look &mdash; "'tis Dinah" &mdash; he doth cry&mdash;
"And where Harnol?  Oh has the hero died
Beneath his foe?  he has, I know, that I
Shar'd in his fate!  did with my boy, my Harnol, die?"

Silent he is &mdash; his heart's o'erpow'r'd with grief&mdash;
And first the faithful Bandon would him aid,
And next the stranger bard would lend relief&mdash;
Alvel he is, he who so lately stray'd
By Bergus' flood, when Harnol for him made
Fell Prejudeek so swiftly take to flight,&mdash;
Nor unreturn'd the good, &mdash; the bard allayed,
By song, what after Harnol and the maiden sway'd.

And now no sooner he did 'gin to learn
That Harmond was brave Harnol's aged sire,
Than his kind heart did greatly in him yearn,
And much he did with cheering hope inspire,
The soul of him that doth but death require&mdash;
And now he bids him hear the tale of all&mdash;
It Harmond and Bandon fear'd to desire,
They could not bear to hear of Harnol's fall,
And though he bids them hope, still fear doth them appal.

"'Twas morning fair, the clouds of night were driven
Far from the golden throne of early day,
And fair bright Phoebus' car above in heaven,
Began to winds as daily wont, its way:
When Harnol and this maiden fair did stray,
To meet thee, aged bard, from Bergus' tow'r&mdash;
I, too, them join, and often tune my lay
To send unheeded on the tedious hour,
And kill the woes that weary travellers oft o'erpow'r.

"Nor yet far have we on our journey gone,
When plaint of maiden sad doth reach our ear,
And soon we have her seen &mdash; she looked upon
Great heaven's sky, while in her eye the tear
Hung sad and wild, as she would say severe
Great heaven was, for willing her such woe.&mdash;
Now Harnol to the mourner sad draws near,
And soothing oftens, blames for grieving so,
And begs the cause of her undoubted pain to know.

"But soon the maid doth not with him comply,
As she of sorrow were too much oppressed&mdash;
But when he tells her of sure aidance nigh,
If such from stranger knight she may request,
Hope seems at once to come within her breast,
Nor more is seen hang sad and wild her tear;
And, as now all her hope on him did rest,
She thus 'gan tell what woes her breast did bear,
And how they first arose &mdash; in sooth, sad tale to hear.

"But long it were, too long thee, bard, to tell
All what the maid did of her grievance say,
Let it suffice to give what her befell
In fewer words &mdash; One eve she's borne away
By Ozzavel, he who e'er spent his day
With Carmol base &mdash; and now dark night is near,
And thro' the loneliest ways their journey lay&mdash;
It was where Carmol then did dwelling bear,
With all his people fell, far in Killarney fair.

"And now the maid is filled of every fear,
And stillness is, and dark o'er head the sky&mdash;
But lo!  the moon doth in the heavens appear,
And soon Killarney hills are seen close nigh,
O'er all their woods and vales uprearing high&mdash;
What can the maid? &mdash; from her all hope is gone&mdash;
But lo!  a warrior strange they do espy,
Swift toward Killarney vale he hurried on,
And bright upon his arms the moon's beam trembling shone.

"He says him Carmol's friend, and asks the way
To where the chief, and much of him beside;
And Ozzavel tells all without delay:
Now who those are that do with him reside;
And then who those that wander far and wide,
To search fair maids, and them away to bear;
And, now, he tells that Lando, knight of pride,
And three of his own people wandering were
To find young maiden, Zainah named, of beauty rare.

"Then tells he of Belzairah, the said maid
Whom he this eve did bear from her own vale,
And whom he now, perforce, doth with him lead
Where Carmol bides &mdash; but here doth end his tale,
For now the stranger knight did him assail&mdash;
And boldly does the foe in wrath defend,&mdash;
That dread the fight &mdash; but Ozzavel doth fail&mdash;
And glad the maid, for she hath found a friend,
And all the fears so late possessed now see an end.

"And she doth love the knight who did her free&mdash;
Ah why love him!  with her he is no more&mdash;
He would go Carmol meet, but victory
Fell not his share, and th' angry foe him bore
To dungeon low, where all his hopes are o'er&mdash;
And there now, too, is Harnol, knight of fame:
For much the maiden's tale did grieve him sore,
And he would free her love, who was the same
He with his sire late left &mdash; and Architon his name."

So Alvel spake, and Harmond did him hear&mdash;
At once his look is fix'd, and sad, and wild,&mdash;
But is not long &mdash; at first a joyful tear,
And next a smile is seen &mdash; he now is mild&mdash;
And proudly cries, "of what am I beguil'd?
Of Harnol &mdash; son so great in soul and might&mdash;
But all must fall, and why not too my child?
But he has glorious fall'n, 'twas honour's right&mdash;
But wrong &mdash; he lives, he's fam'd, my soul, with joy be bright.

"And, Bandon, thou, also, at heart, be glad&mdash;
Great is the glory that Architon gains&mdash;
O youthful knight!  would that such fame you had!
But such you shall &mdash; it now to thee remains,
O Bandon!  to be brave! &mdash; when morning deigns
Upon the east her early beam to throw,
All of us shall go from Limercus' plains,
Lucan anew to search &mdash; the haughty foe,
Bandon and he shall meet &mdash; yes, heaven, have it so!"

"Yes," Bandon cries, "I for the two will fight&mdash;
All shall be free, or all in dungeon thrown&mdash;
But why should I seek Lucan, noble knight?
I will, O bard!  go meet the foe alone,
And have at once the fame of all, or none&mdash;
If else &mdash; what would the song in future say?
Lucan would have his meed, I be unknown&mdash;
Then let me, bard, go to the vale &mdash; I may
O'ercome who guard the tow'r, and mighty Carmol slay."

Quoth Harmond, "he who would acquire of fame,
Should not through rashness it expect to find;
So Harnol and Architon are to blame,&mdash;
E'en, at the least, their strength should be combin'd,
And they should still great fame acquire &mdash; but blind
Through eager love of that, they were to all&mdash;
Hence they did not succeed, but were confin'd
In dungeon drear, where they, no doubt, recal
To mind their rashness now, and leave on it their fail."

He said, &mdash; and Bandon shows all difference meet:
"O aged sire, forgive thy son," he cries,
"If he has urged of aught for him unfit&mdash;
'Tis not for me to say, thou art not wise&mdash;
Thou who hast taught my fallen soul to rise
From what it was, to be that which 'tis now&mdash;
O never shall I, bard, thy word despise!
As late, thy virtuous counsel still bestow,
I feel it's heav'nly light now in my bosom glow."

He said, and aged Harmond heard content,
Heard as the soul of him doth ever hear,
Who has, as he, upraised to high intent
A fallen mind &mdash; O fame!  wert thou more dear,
E'en than thou art, yet light thou wouldst appear
For meed of him, so much is ever due
Of praise to all, who like to Harmond rear,
By counsel wise, a mind to noble view&mdash;
Sure, such the proudest feat that mortal man may do!

