Away with night, and all those orbs which fill
Then silent heaven! &mdash; when morn appears where they?
Now fair the sun is rising on the hill,
Already clad in all his bright array
Of fiery arms, and loud the tuneful lay
Of early bird by hill and valley's side;
While o'er the dew the flocks all bleating stray,
And freshest shrubs and flowers, fair summer's pride,
Do rear them with the morn, all bright thro' heavens wide.

And o'er thee too, Killarney, morn is bright,
Though Carmol and his people still are there,
Frowning oppression from thy loveliest height!
But when wert thou, Killarney, not seen fair?
I once beheld thee, and thy woods all were
Then loveliest bloom, and clear thy lake to see,
And bright in heaven their heads thy hills did rear&mdash;
Nor then, tho' Carmol did not look on thee
To fling oppression down, wert thou, Killarney, free?

And yet wert lovely &mdash; and thy sons e'en proud,
As tho' they never knew of others' sway,
Or then their country 'neath no Carmol bowed,
Which oft it has, &mdash; yes, e'en in happier day!&mdash;
Oh tyrants! &mdash; here at least ye should you stay!&mdash;
This threefold breaks all bound which nature deigns,
'Tis for the cruel of other lands to lay
Thy rights, thy country, and her sons in chains,
But ye, at least, should not oppress your native plains.

Yet there are those who would be Carmol still!
False hearted Carmol! &mdash; he who now doth stand
With all his gloomy people on the hill,
As threatening vengeance o'er his native land.
All armed he is: &mdash; his spear is in his hand&mdash;
A youthful ash hewn from the mountain side,
Which sure to wield may strength of arm demand!
And high his crest doth nod, as in its pride&mdash;
And bright his large square shield beams o'er Killarney wide.

And Carmiline, too, of false heart, is near;
The next he stands to Carmol, haughty knight,
And armed as he:  he holds a mighty spear,
And proudly too his crest doth nod on height,
And his great shield beams o'er Killarney bright&mdash;
As Carmol, too, he seeks to ruin fair maid.
And both do fling afar their gloomy sight,
To weet what now may fortune hither lead&mdash;
Fear of detection's gone &mdash; of nought are they afraid.

And who he stalking near, too of great size&mdash;
Drear is his look, and 'neath his sullen brow,
As two red stars of evil fate, his eyes,
At times, their angry glare around him throw?
Dark Strangus, knight of fellest strength, 'tis thou&mdash;
Tall Carmiline thee late in desert found,
Where thou used dwell by day in cave down low,
And madest with the night thy awful round,
To rob or slay him whoe'er nigh his journey bound.

And of such aid as thine is Carmol glad:
"Dark Strangus, as we all," he in him cries,
"If should detection come, will not count bad.
Or mean the deed, to swear that Lucan lies,
Or Harnol, or who else that 'fore the eyes
Of Gellimus our crimes might naked lay;
Hence is he dear, nor shall we e'er despise
Aid like to his, if fortune ever may
Hither direct his like upon another day."

So he unheard, and look'd upon his crew;
Full thirty he doth all around him see,
Beside two other mighty knights, that do
Bide in the tow'r below its guard to be.&mdash;
There Carmol would not more by day, as he
Is nigh himself and all within confined&mdash;
And there one beauteous maiden's too; late she
Was thither brought, and now her troubled mind,
For first doth feel the weight of woes to it assigned.

The knights of Lando 'twas her hither brought&mdash;
But yet he doth not come; for other way,
When he her lately gave to them, he sought,
And hence that which alone doth him delay.
For much the knight did fear upon the day
When he the maid did bear from her own vale,
That friend of hers might follow and him slay,
And such to shun, he would him then avail
Of other route, and all his dread the while conceal.

Much Carmol marvels why the knight has stay'd&mdash;
But does not long &mdash; "I see him," he doth cry,
"Yonder he comes, or one as he array'd,
But Lando 'tis &mdash; he to the tower doth hie,
He knows his love is there, she whose blue eye
Has smitten, sure, the valiant hero's heart&mdash;
He enters now &mdash; she shrieks &mdash; but, maiden, why
Doest thou do so, since he who thus can smart
That soul with dread, shall be erelong its dearest part?

"And so should beauteous Dinah Carmol love,
Tho' for him now she bears such wondrous hate;
As e'en from sight of him to make her rove
Far through the world, as they her tale relate&mdash;"
At this he sudden ceased, for uproar great
All then did b'lieve to hear within the tower&mdash;
Nor was it else, and Carmol's heart doth beat&mdash;
He marvels why &mdash; and b'lieves to see his hour
At length approach, and every dread doth him o'erpower.

But soon he bids the boding fear begone,
And wrath does now his angry soul inflame;
Hence to the tower he hies to cast upon
Lando his rage for what him so o'ercame.
And all his people e'en did feel the same;
And they, as Carmol, also blame the knight:
"Away with Lando," all, at once, exclaim,
"'Twas he whose wrath did cause inside the fight,
With those who guard the tower, and hence arose our fright."

They said &mdash; and toward the tower all hasty hie,
As fellest vengeance then their breasts did swell&mdash;
But lo upon the way they stop, and cry
"Away from us now every notion fell,
Which did but e'en this instant with us dwell!&mdash;
Lando behold, and those who fought inside!
And hither are their looks, as tho' to tell
That anger doth no more with them abide,
And that they sorrow feel for having terrified.

"Then we forgive" &mdash; They said, and, been drawn nigh
Where stands the tower, the knight they loudly hail&mdash;
But he is silent, nor do those reply
Who with him are &mdash; and oft across the vale
Their looks do go, as they would thither steal.&mdash;
This Carmol marks, and b'lieves they do him fear
For that they did each other now assail,
And oft he bids no more their dread appear,
For that they all this day in revelry should share.

"Yes, shall this day," he cries, "in mirth be spent;
For I do feel of trouble in me grow,
Which if not banished in loose merriment
Else may not be &mdash; But why should Carmol know
Of trouble aught?  did not Brydain bestow
On me of all Killarney round the sway&mdash;
And who may tell that I do govern so?
Those whom I have within confined &mdash; but stay&mdash;
If those within cut off, who then tell Brydain may?

"Sure none &mdash; then shall they fall, for there we hold
Our greatest foe &mdash; this Harnol, daring knight&mdash;
Of Brydain's host he is, and I of old
Do know the youth &mdash; together in the fight
We oft have fought; and strong, sure, his proof might
Against us be, as he not Brydain's foe;
Beside, he, whom 'fore him we've ta'en, if right
May Carmol read, is one whom Harnol so
Esteem'd, as he would seek for him our overthrow.

"Then shall they both e'en at this instant die,&mdash;
And Hermon too &mdash; hence, Lando, we secure
Can from detection live, for none are nigh,
Save those within, whom we may not allure
By wealthy bribe into our host; then, sure,
No dread can more be ours, but soon we will
The praise of even Guellimus procure,
For ye shall swear that I commotion still,
And with his just behest this country round me fill.

"And he, no doubt, of such shall gladly hear,
And to the pow'r we have of more soon add,
That one day e'en all Erin Land may fear
Our dreaded names &mdash; Oh how my soul is glad!&mdash;
Now lost the fear which it this day has had!
Forthwith I see to rise my mighty fame&mdash;
I e'en foresee that Brydain shall be sad
Through fear of me; for when I pow'r can claim,
We hosts shall raise, and send 'gainst Brydain too my name!

"Then, Carmiline, Lando, and Strangus, you,&mdash;
Three mighty names!  to Carmol's word attend!
You see his soul, and know what he may do,
When e'en he trusts to make great Brydain bend
To his high pow'r, and far his fame extend&mdash;
And so he shall &mdash; but first 'tis fit that he&mdash;
And ye &mdash; make show of zeal, unto the end,
Brydain of us in no suspicion be&mdash;
This do, and Carmol, as himself, you great shall see.

"But well I know, that ye shall willing do
What he will have; hence soon shall Brydain say,
'Carmol is loyal, and beside those who
Do hear his word, on them rely we may&mdash;
They never will the trust impos'd betray&mdash;'
Ah fools!  indeed, why did we join your part?
That thus we might arrive at pow'r one day&mdash;
Not else it was, for we a foe at heart&mdash;
The truth of which, ere long, ye shall know to thy smart!"

He said, and wrathful look'd upon the tow'r&mdash;
Aloud his gloomy knights do shout consent&mdash;
As when the fury of the skies doth lower
On all the fearful world beneath, as bent
Straight on its ruin, or some fell intent&mdash;
The angry storms behold his frown, and hail
With roars his purpose dire, that heaven's rent,
And all the herd fly fearful through the vale,
To seek the wood, and hide them from what would assail.

So Carmol's knights loud hail'd his wrathful look&mdash;
Full well they all did guess his purpose dire&mdash;
At once his angry sword in hand he took,
And enter'd straight, as tho' his soul on fire,
To slay the knights who stirr'd alone his ire&mdash;
But now what does he see? &mdash; "They slain," he cries,&mdash;
"And hence the uproar that did late inspire
Our breasts with fear &mdash; They Lando's wrath made rise
That he might end at once their cruel miseries.

"And so he did, but without leave of mine.
Hence is he wrong, and hence no doubt his fears,&mdash;
And thus that I have seen him to repine,
While all beside did give to heaven their cheers&mdash;
But Hermon &mdash; yes aged Hermon &mdash; It appears
He is not slain &mdash; or if &mdash; he's slain below;
For neither sure of these is he &mdash; he wears
A look more grave &mdash; then to his ward I go&mdash;
The blood of one at least, by Carmol's sword must flow."

He said, and hurried to the dungeon blind&mdash;
Hoping that Hermon by his sword would bleed&mdash;
But bared its iron door, and he must find
The key thereof before he can the deed&mdash;
And now he hies to get what he doth need
From those who kept of all the tower the keys&mdash;
Yet on the way he stops, tho' great his speed,
The burning wrath which doth so on him seize,
To wreak upon the slain, as tho' such might him ease.

And as he now in either sends his sword,
"O would!  that I could give you life," he cries,
"If so, ten thousand I should then afford,
That I ten thousand deaths could have &mdash; Oh rise
In wrath, my soul, and leave to human eyes
Not sight of those &mdash; ah!  which is Harnol, say?
He merits most my sword &mdash; but blood so lies,
With wounds, on either face, that Carmol may
Not know the knight from him who 'fore him here did stray."

He says and hundred times them pierces through,
And now from either body lops the head,
And often cries, "O would!  that, Lucan, you
Where present too, as those you should lie dead
Beneath my sword, and share my vengeance dread&mdash;
But fate, thee, Lucan, from my wrath doth save,
And 'gainst the vanquished only it is led&mdash;
But one there is at least which I can crave&mdash;
Yes aged Hermon to my vengeance fate doth leave."

He said, and sudden from the slaughter ceas'd&mdash;
And rushed abroad, &mdash; but then for him what sight&mdash;
Upon the plain he sees ten knights at least
Lie in their blood &mdash; and all beneath the might
Of him whom he b'lieves Lando, his own knight,
That aided seems by those who watched of late&mdash;
He runs in wrath, but some do stay his flight,
And trembling much, as tho' in terror great,
Thus what they of the frightful contest know relate.

"O Carmol!  thou see'st not Lando thy friend,
That is strange knight, who does him Bandon name;
And those who 'side him fight, are they whose end
You went to have &mdash; for Bandon overcame
The two who watch'd the tow'r, and in the same
Steel armour that they wore, the prisoners drest.
E'en, too, it seems, that Lando, knight of fame,
He conquer'd has, for those his arms at least&mdash;
But, Carmol, lo!  who dreadful comes!  great is his haste!"

They said &mdash; and Carmol b'lieveth not to hear
What he has heard, so dread upon him took&mdash;
And now his heart doth beat with boding fear,
As back, to weet who comes, he turns his look&mdash;
And O what sight!  his ev'ry member shook,
And swift in 'mid of all his knights he flies&mdash;
For Lucan's self he saw, and strength forsook
His soul at once &mdash; to hide him close he tries,
And curses, as he does, a thousand times the skies&mdash;

And now his late ambitious hopes are o'er,
And thoughts of lowest kind do come in place&mdash;
He would that being he had never bore&mdash;
Or if of being, that of vilest race
Which crawls on earth he was, so dread the case
In which he doth him b'lieve &mdash; Meanwhile Lucan, knight
Of bravest soul, arriveth in short space&mdash;
Harnol, Architon, and Bandon, at the sight,
Send their great shouts to heav'n, and fearless stand for fight.

But who durst here the valiant knights oppose?
Now Carmiline the tall 'neath Harnol fell&mdash;
And now Strangus, beneath Architon's blows&mdash;
And three beside, who would Bandon repel&mdash;
They were the same that ev'ry night used dwell
Beside the tow'r, there closest watch to hold&mdash;
And Carmol b'liev'd not ten might them compel
To yield in fight, hence wonder'd to behold,
How all 'neath one, 'neath Bandon's arm, in death were roll'd.

For Bandon's brave a knight as sword might wield&mdash;
The first he is, who Carmol doth descry,
As 'mid his knights he crouch'd upon the field,
And trembl'd at the wrath of Lucan's eye&mdash;
But they do not him hide when danger's nigh&mdash;
They see the flaming sword of Lando now,
Bandon, with threatening look, it wields on high,
And points to Lucan where the haughty foe,
Who 'gins appear as from him round the knights do go.

"Hail, Carmol, noble chieftain," Lucan cried,
"Thou who me hast so late in battle slain,
If true what some have told &mdash; but they have lied,
And Carmol too, for lo Lucan again!
And needless are those arms that thou wouldst fain
Make all believe, to've been the arms of mine,
And, tyrant, hence ere long upon the plain,
As yonder now does haughty Carmiline,
In death beneath this spear, thou shalt them me resign.

"Yes see fell Carmiline 'neath Harnol brave!
In life he was, Carmol, as base as thou&mdash;
And would chaste Merah, constant maid, deceive;
As thou wouldst Dinah e'er &mdash; but, tyrant, lo
Thy efforts have been vain, for yonder now
The maidens rest secure within that shade,
And thence look on the strife, as they would know
If ye are brave, and if thy knights true aid
Shall to you lend, those knights so great to fright lone maid.

"But they do witness how ye are not brave:
Weak against Harnol's sword was Carmiline;
And they, no doubt, thee mark'd when thou wouldst save
Thee 'mong thy people from this sword of mine&mdash;
But where are now that numerous aid of thine?
Tyrant, but cast thy look to yonder hill&mdash;
Behold them!  in the race they are divine!
Bandon tho' swift of foot, your's still
Surpass him, and beside with shrieks the valleys fill.

"Thus 'tis the coward at heart who joins the base,
And loves to practise for him wicked deed;
And Carmol would to such as this give place,
While none there were who might his doings heed&mdash;
But did he hope, if peace were come, to speed
Long in his crimes &mdash; Ah, fool, such hope were vain;
For not so hard my country's foe, indeed,
That they would have thee in such wise remain,
Tho' even so they were all Erin-land to gain.

"Hence, Carmol, I thee to my foe would yield,
If hope there were that they thy crimes could know;
But still commotion lasts, tho' in the field
No battle is, &mdash; and they might let thee go
Thro' perjury of thine, or of those who
Did with thee bide, in hopes ye 'gain would aid
Them in the strife, if 'gain they meet their foe&mdash;
Yes such might be &mdash; and hence more safe I read,
To try thee on this plain, then elsewhere now to lead.

"Then why thy people didst thou hither send,
With order Dinah from her sire to bear,
And if that sire refus'd in death t' extend
The aged chief &mdash; answer, base Carmol, where
Thou didst such pow'r find &mdash; and too declare
If that same pow'r did also thee permit
To raise here bloody strife, and in cave drear
Use aged Hermon?  as thou didst think fit?
If pow'r thou hadst for such, know tyranny was it.

"But if thou usedst not of tyranny,
Nor didst of aught unlawful thou shalt say,
Then prove 'fore heaven just that truth's with thee,
By force of arms, here on this plain you may&mdash;
And, heaven, look impartially this day&mdash;
Before thy mighty throne I bring my cause,
And if 'tis wrong, great Carmol then shall lay
Lucan in death &mdash; but if thy upright laws
Shall find it just, then he from Carmol conquest draws."

He says, and wields in heaven his fatal spear,
And stands as now preparing for the fight;
Nor less doth haughty Carmol soon appear,
As he did long to prove how great his might.
But tho' he thus, his soul doth sigh for flight;
But flight he knows is death more sure, indeed;
Since Lucan still upholds that spear which knight
Of swiftest foot might not outstrip, such speed
It had when sent by him who oft made foe to bleed.

Yes this he knows, and sees, save in the fight,
No hope; to yield was death more sure than all&mdash;
For what would Brydain say, if all to light
By Lucan brought, e'en by his own withal?
For he no more them faithful now can call&mdash;
Hence doth he hasty for the strife prepare,
As though did nought within his breast appal,
Tho' fear, and ev'ry other ill that bear
Upon a soul of sinfulness, were strongest there.

And now he lifts his spear, and thus aloud,
To Lucan nigh: &mdash; "Vain knight, doest thou believe,
Through speech like this, my heart with fear to cloud,
If so, then vain thy hope is to bereave
Carmol of what has render'd him so brave,
'Tis of that soul which never dreaded foe&mdash;
I could thee show how thou dost lie and rave
In all now by thee said, but, boaster, know
The brave with arms alone the truth would ever show."

He said, and with the word so sent his spear,
That Lucan, watchful as e'er spear did wield,
Beheld it not, until for him too near
It came to take upon his noble shield&mdash;
But heaven, &mdash; or fate &mdash; or else &mdash; did succour yield&mdash;
Right to the throat the spear did mark its way;
And when near there arriv'd, upon the field
It sudden fell, as shield did it delay&mdash;
But such did not, 'twas heaven alone, sure, bid it stay.

This Carmol saw, and thus he 'gain aloud:
"Heaven, no doubt, thee, Lucan, lends of aid;
For were it not for heaven that crest so proud
Was now in dust, and death upon thee laid&mdash;
But, Lucan, do me not hence judge afraid&mdash;
Know Carmol still has all his strength and pride,
Nor does he heaven for aiding thee upbraid,
He gives thee it, and all thou wouldst beside,
For, wanting such, but weak thou wert him to abide."

He ceas'd, &mdash; and thus him Lucan answers bold:
"Carmol, that heaven did lend its aid, 'tis true,
But know, I do me pride from heaven to hold
The favour great, as all that hold I do,
From Heaven comes, and thus with Carmol too&mdash;
Then can he never say, tho' he me kill,
That void of heaven's aid he Lucan slew&mdash;
That could not be, for 'tis great heaven still,
Tho' 'neath thy sword I fall and bleed, that conquer will."

This Carmol heard, nor could his soul deny
All what the brave and pious chief has said.
"O great he is!"  he in himself doth cry!
"And he, not Carmol, shall have heaven's aid,&mdash;
For he did never war 'gainst heaven lead,&mdash;
But Carmol did, wherefore me ills await&mdash;"
But lo!  he wields, I will not seem afraid&mdash;
He said, and, as with courage high replete,
Upheld his shield to meet the spear of Lucan great.

But now so furiously the knight it sent,
That shield, or what else might it stay, was vain&mdash;
Beside it bore his boss, it angry rent
That plate which safest guards the breast in 'twain,
Then entered in &mdash; he falls upon the plain&mdash;
All hear the shock, and wide the vales resound:
As when a rock, high rais'd above the main,
Or storm or thunder tumbles to the ground&mdash;
The coast re-echoes far, the seaman stands astound.

So did the vales resound to Carmol's fall:
Full length and bleeding on the plain he lies,
And dying, curses Lucan, heav'n, and all
That chance doth bring afore his gloomy eyes:
And now where Dinah is afar he spies&mdash;
The sight is more than death upon his heart&mdash;
"Behold my foe, Lucan, happy," he cries&mdash;
"O could I now send to her soul one dart,
Then of a thousand deaths would Carmol bear the smart!"

No more he can &mdash; here death doth on hint seize&mdash;
Close nigh the while does Lucan silent stand.
And give of contest won to heaven the praise,
And cry, "O never may my native land
Have foe again like Carmol to withstand&mdash;"
And now he views the vale around him far,
And sees her aged sons, on every hand,
Creep from their woods and rocks, where they did bar,
Them long from him of whom they now deliver'd are.

And ev'ry voice doth bless the hero's might,
That grateful sound re-echoes through the vale:
As when first morning breaks upon the night,
And early birds for far are heard to hail
The happy change, that wood, and bow'r, and dale,
Are pleasant all; &mdash; so they the hero greet,
For now no more their terrors them assail&mdash;
And soon the other gallant knights they meet,
Who did, while Lucan fought, the victory complete.

And now together all go to the tow'r,
The aged Hermon from his chains to free:
He there, alas!  has spent full many an hour,
Without the face of heaven once to see&mdash;
Low down they find him 'mid obscurity,
On the cold earth by heavy chains fast bound&mdash;
They him unbind, and say his friends to be,
At name of friends he lists as one astound&mdash;
And, as o'erpower'd therewith, now faints upon the ground.

But they do bear him to the air above,
Where soon his heavy swoon doth pass away.
And now his looks on Lucan fell &mdash; he strove
T' embrace the knight &mdash; but vain was his essay
Did not the chief then in his arms him lay;
And there it was that he soon 'gan to speak&mdash;
But yet as one long pent in dungeon may&mdash;
Oft 'mid his word his strength would him forsake,
And heavy swoon anew then on him cruel take.

And 'bout his Dinah 'tis he would enquire,
And Lucan now doth her at distance show,
As she is moving hasty toward her sire&mdash;
But when he looks light doth oppress him so,
That where the maid his eyes he ill may throw;
And while she coming is he doth demand,
Where she did 'bide while he in dungeon low
Did so long time his heavy woes withstand,
Still mourning her sad fate, and for his native land.

Quoth Lucan, "she did range in quest of me,
That I might come thee, Hermon, to release;
And I her, too, did seek continually,
As did I hear of her sad, woful case,
And how she did me seek in ev'ry place&mdash;
But long sought she, and long sought I in vain;
At length did fate to be so cruel cease&mdash;
The other eve she met me on the plain,
And rush'd into those arms, and sigh'd and wept amain.

"Then toward Limercus did I hasty bear&mdash;
Belzairah, she who comes the foremost now,
Me told that Dinah late did wander there,
When Carmol did young Harnol brave o'erthrow&mdash;
But yet, she would not have me thither go,
Until I first would her Architon free,&mdash;
For hence the maid did seek me high and low,&mdash;
Yet could I not meet her love's enemy,
Until my Dinah first I would from peril see.

"And hence I did in every wish succeed:
First of all Carmol's knights did Lando die;
We met him as he hither did proceed,
And Bandon did he to the strife defy.
But soon he fell &mdash; and in his arms then I
Here sent our knight, that he the tower might gain,
And free his friends, ere all should us descry&mdash;
Which so he did, &mdash; for he has boldly slain
Those two that watched within, and freed our friends from chain."

He now doth cease, for Dinah is just nigh;
And 'side her Merah is, who on her knight
Still as she comes doth throw a hopeless eye&mdash;
Yet need she not, for Lucan doth recite
To him all of the maid Sisserah hight,&mdash;
That now the youth, as all, has joy at heart&mdash;
And next his aged sire doth bless his sight,
Behind, with Alvel, he is coming smart,
And do his weeping looks his joy of soul impart.

And ere an instant is they all do meet,
Then nought is seen at once save tears of joy,
Nor may one hear but words that tender greet,
Such as true friends and lovers e'er employ,
When they do meet, and nought their bliss destroy&mdash;
Here Dinah and her aged sire embrace,
And here now Harmond and his own dear boy,
Nor may Architon and Belzairah cease,
Nor Bandon and that maid whom he did just release.

Zainah her name, young maiden chaste and fair;
She did not hope &mdash; that any might her free
From Lando's thrall, which she knew not to bear,
When Bandon came, and her alone did see
Far in the tow'r amid obscurity&mdash;
E'en at the first she did him Lando b'lieve,
And loudly too did shriek thereat, but he
Her trembling soul at once did undeceive,
And bid her trust in him, and not so sadly grieve.

Hence doth she love the knight, since she has found
Freedom through him, and he too loves the maid&mdash;
So do they share in bliss, and all around
Is bliss a great &mdash;  Alvel just nigh him laid
With his sweet harp, that from his song the shade
Re-echoes through &mdash; and of their deeds he sung,
And all the heavy ills &mdash; which they essay'd,
As woods and lonely ways they stray'd among,
Where night or day their cruel fate them ever flung.

And Hermon now on Harmond throws his eye&mdash;
But throws at once a look as in amaze&mdash;
And ere a moment's pass'd he loud doth cry,
It is e'en he &mdash; Harmond &mdash; not more he says,
But, as in heavy swoon, him backwards lays&mdash;
Harmond is fill'd with wonder at the sight,
And Hermon views &mdash; but oh!  what doth him seize&mdash;
It is the same, he cries, Harmond is right&mdash;
This Bolden, erst my friend, in youth so great a knight.

Not more he could &mdash; in Hermon's arms he fell&mdash;
Whatever friends may meeting find they share&mdash;
They look &mdash; they weep &mdash; in sooth, words may not tell
All what they know, for such is more than rare,
And few the breasts that might such feeling bear&mdash;
But now they cease, and speak of youthful day;
And Harmond prays of Hermon to declare!
Why he's so call'd, and if that babe still may
Be living, whom, when Constah died, he bore away.

"Ah!  Bourdin's friends," quoth he, "became my foe,
For well they knew that I did lend thee aid
Upon that night when thou didst overthrow
The haughty chief, as Constah, lovely maid,
He would have ta'en &mdash; hence often they essay'd,
Through high reward, tidings of me to hear,
That I to shun their vengeance hither stray'd,
And then me Hermon called &mdash; thy babe so dear
I also with me brought, &mdash; lo her in Dinah there!"

He says, and wonder all again doth fill,
But Dinah, Harnol, and ag'd Harmond most&mdash;
They meet, they look, they sigh, they weep, until
To ev'ry thought beside, they seem as lost&mdash;
But Harmond's more than joy &mdash; he doth accost,
In rapturous praise, great heavens o'er and o'er;
And as of reason reft, he loud doth boast
His joy of soul to all who near them bore,&mdash;
And doth he Dinah bless, and Hermon ever more.

Remain now in such wise sometime they do,
When all at once them coming toward they spy
A knight as fair as ever sun did view,
And mounted is on a courser high.
As he drew near, "lo there my friend," doth cry
Lucan aloud!  "that Ozmond, youth of might,
He who so bravely by me stood when I
Did for Sisserah, maiden fair, late fight&mdash;
'Twas then she fell 'neath spear of Carmiline, base knight.

"But long since then did Ozmond with me stray,
And much too did acquire of worthy fame,
Till he me quit upon the other day,
And elsewhere went adventure new to claim.&mdash;
Great Gellimus he never ceas'd to blame,
And all who are to Erin land a foe;
And in his head the thought full often came.
To seek by means unfair their overthrow&mdash;
But I would not consent &mdash; hence he alone did go."

Here Lucan ceased, for Ozmond now is nigh,
And all do hail and bless the venturous knight,
And joyful tell their tale &mdash; but oft a sigh
Doth break from him, as sorrows were in sight&mdash;
Yet do his eyes, at times, beam transport bright&mdash;
Hence many marvel that oft they hear
His heavy sigh &mdash; and now all beg he might
To them relate why sad he doth appear,
When they saw joy and hope, and every bliss, too, near.

"Ah!  reason," cries he, "have I to be so;
For Erin land must never hope again&mdash;
Her foes advance and carry with them woe,
And henceforth trouble here shall hold its reign.
For we are to be made their slaves or slain"&mdash;
He said, and 'gain doth heavy heave a sigh,
That all, at once, are heard to mourn a main,
And banish hope &mdash; but now whom do they spy?
Not Ozmond more &mdash; 'tis Gellimus himself, they cry.

Yes it was he &mdash; unknown through Erin land
He travell'd has &mdash; for he would Lucan try,
And know if true what all did understand&mdash;
That he was great of soul &mdash; "but," doth he cry,
"More great of soul he is than ever I
Did of him hear, and hence it ne'er shall be
For Gellimus to cause his land to sigh,
Or those two friends whom I from Brydain see&mdash;
How great!  They teach me, hapless land to look on thee.

"And, Lucan, so I shall &mdash; but it is done&mdash;
Swift hither from Limercus have I stray'd,
For much I've fear'd you or your knights should run
Great risk with Carmol, if the strife was made
Ere I arriv'd &mdash; but heaven did you aid&mdash;
Wherefore ye won, and slew the base of mind&mdash;
Then to Limercus hie &mdash; war's there allay'd&mdash;
And what is just from Brydain ye shall find&mdash;
For there all have my word, and know how to be kind."

He says, and thousand voices loud him cheer&mdash;
Hope comes at once &mdash; away with terrors wrong&mdash;
The maids, the youth, for far around, appear&mdash;
They raise the laugh, the dance, the pleasant song,
And all is glee the sunny vale along&mdash;
Ag'd Alvel with his harp is too at hand&mdash;
He sings their joy &mdash; the maids around him throng,
And oft the tale of Dinah's love demand,
That all, erelong, is spread afar thro' Erin land.

Zairah has heard &mdash; I wake by night no more&mdash;
But hold &mdash; yet 'tis not so &mdash; thy bard forgot&mdash;
Foul breach of promise must be sung &mdash; then o'er
My first, my earliest song &mdash; until then &mdash; not.&mdash;
But must I change, and, maiden, sing of what
Will cause that breast to heave &mdash; thy tear to flow?&mdash;
In sooth, 'tis hard &mdash; too hard &mdash; away the thought!
I cannot &mdash; would not &mdash; Zairah, grieve thee so&mdash;
Till now 'twas well &mdash; 'twere sad to sing thy country's woe.

And long, too long, perhap, this song hath been&mdash;
And it bears sign, not to his bard unknown,
Of what his night of sorrow e'er has seen&mdash;
For fate had evils o'er his being thrown,
And he has e'er had sorrows of his own&mdash;
Nor was it, maid, for him the song to chuse&mdash;
What came at first remained as gift bestown
From thee or heaven &mdash; without to change &mdash; refuse,
As fortune ne'er hath graced his wild untutored muse.

And this hath been &mdash; and in the world alone
E'er has he lived, as not to it allied,
Or he were in it stranger scarcely known&mdash;
So has his soul e'er felt itself denied
Of all communion that must, sure, reside
Where friend may friend, or brother brother, find;
And hence his fortune has been to abide,
Alone, unsoothed, woes of heaviest kind,
Which e'er hath heaven sent a burthen to his mind.

But these will now be o'er, or ne'er will not&mdash;
Yet should the former hap it will be well&mdash;
And he can say he has foreseen his lot,
For even when the heaviest ills befell,
A dream of days to come, his soul would swell,
And tell of something near, and evils gone&mdash;
Nor does that cease still oft with him to dwell,
As though it hath not for delusion shone&mdash;
But if for such it hath? &mdash; why then, ye ills, roll on!&mdash;

Zairah has heard &mdash; I wake by night no more&mdash;
Adieu the darksome wood, the silent shade&mdash;
My first, my earliest song, dear girl, is o'er,
And I do cease my wanderings to lead,
Aught more, through lonely part with knight or maid&mdash;
Oh, Zairah!  deign one smile upon my lay&mdash;
And pardon, love, if I have wrongly strayed&mdash;
If from that path have turned, at times, away,
Which leads to Fame's great height the bard of later day.
