'Tis 'bout the tide of noon, &mdash; o'er head the sun
Doth midway lean, in all his radiance bright,
As tho' to rest him from his task half done,
That better bide he may his course ere night;
And all the heavens look splendid from his light;
Around red fiery hue th' horizon yields;
And fair above the clouds oft change to sight;
Now like embattled hosts with spears and shields&mdash;
Now numerous herds, wide ranging heaven's airy fields.

Meanwhile 'tis calmness all and heat below:
Beneath the oak the shepherd hath him laid;
And from the plains the flocks do bleating go,
To screen them 'side the wood or valley's shade.
The wearied traveller too has journey stayed
Close by the way he willing lays him down,
Yet oft looks on the sun still 'bove arrayed,
As tho' from his high place he wished him gone,
Till with fair even-tide he hold his journey on.

And now it is when Lucan, noble knight,
His way doth from Narrennah's 'bode renew:
And Merah and Sisserah, maidens bright,
As late do bear their wanderings with him too;
And 'gin they lonely part soon travel through:
Now by dark valley's side, now mountain gray;
Where nature's loveliest scenes unheeded grew:
And now thro' woods and wilds, and many a way,
By which the lonely traveller seldom journey may.

And while they travel do, the heavens began
To sudden change &mdash; the sun is seen no more;
And o'er the hills the gathering clouds fast ran&mdash;
That all the sky so bright but just before,
They spread soon with their gloomy wanderings o'er.
Nor silent long above is wrathful Jove&mdash;
He comes and all the heavens do hear his roar;
And clouds and winds before him angry rove;
Which shouting he pursues, as though his mighty drove.

Hard by the maidens see a shady wood,
And thither hie to shun the tempest drear;
Nor long beneath its wrath brave Lucan stood,
After the maids he swiftly doth repair:
But when he enters all is darkness there;
That 'tis in vain to try the maids to find&mdash;
By turns he hears their cry, yet knows not where,
So through the gloomy wood, all unconfin'd,
Loud roaring is the thunder and the angry wind!

And now he travell'd has that wood long way,
To search the maids, and still the storm doth last;
Nor does he living creature meet that may
Him of them tell for all that he has pass'd.
At length, no more the heavens are overcast;
The wandering clouds go to their hills of rest,
And all the angry winds are ceasing fast;
While Phoebus fair again the world has bless'd,
Broad o'er the wave he hangs, and brightens all the west,

All doth a change so happy joyous hail:
Tuneful the voice of grove and pleasant shade;
And loud the lowings of the verdant vale,
Where o'er the glittering herb the herds all strayed,
Right glad to be no more in bowers delay'd;
Yet Lucan, generous knight, is sunk in woe;
In vain he even now new searches made,
And wearied from the wood at length doth go,
To weet if of the maids elsewhere he aught might know.

And now in travelling is nigh pass'd that day;
And still thro' woods he does his wandering bear,
Yet never meets he one in all his way,
Who of the hapless maidens aught might hear,
Or of his Dinah, maid than all more dear;
And now at length is close of even nigh,
When just before him did a knight appear,
Fair was he mounted on a courser high,
And bright in all his arms he looked as Phoebus' sky.

Him greeting humbly, Lucan doth demand,
If he no where the maids that eve did see,
And next if he were knight of Erin land,
Or come to Erin land from o'er the sea&mdash;
"No where I've seen the maids this eve," quoth he:
"And I am, Sir, a knight of Erin land,
And not one come to it from o'er the sea;
But this day first I've taken sword in hand,
My country's cause to serve and warfare understand."

"Young knight," cries Lucan, "great must be thy heart,
For but the great of heart such minds can show,
Who studies arms first for his country's part,
Sure Heaven shall teach the use of arms to know:
Then wilt thou come with me, young knight, I go
Thro' Erin land to search three maidens dear,
And guard them if I can from cruel foe,
That in our vanquish'd country doth appear,
Filling the aged and fair maids with dread, I hear?"

"Sir," cries the stranger, "I do willing go,
The maids with thee to search, for it were shame
To see them 'come the prey of cruel foe,
Whom too the aged fear &mdash; O where their fame&mdash;
Is it to ruin a land they overcame?
O Ozmond!  if you ever conquer do,
Thus, never let disgrace come on thy name:
More great the vanquished who such ills go through,
Than they who conquer when they cause a land to!"

"Knight," Lucan cries, "'tis not the great of those
Who us o'ercame that so themselves disgrace;
They are, young hero, but the shame of foes,&mdash;
Foes, whose dark souls did never yet give place
To one brave thought, and who can never cease
From doing ill. &mdash; If Gellimus their great
And pow'rful king knew they were acting base,
They would, no doubt, his heavy wrath await,
For he would not thus, sure, a vanquish'd country treat.

"He would not, sure, that cruel Carmol might,
To gain fair Dinah, bind in chains her sire&mdash;"
"And is he yet in chains?"  exclaims the knight,
As half he draws his sword, with soul on fire.
Quoth Lucan, "I must 'bout the same enquire;
Harnol, I hear, his daughter Dinah freed,
But then did from Killarney vale retire,
So well again in chains may Hermon bleed,
For Carmol base doth ever practise wicked deed."

He said, and both now on their journey went,
And highest thought the while their souls doth fill&mdash;
But lo!  at once they see the even spent,
And night, 'mid all her clouds, upon the hill;
Yet on thro' lonely ways they wander still;
And soon the moon doth fair in heavens rise,
And throw her trembling beam upon the rill,
While from her lonely tower the night bird flies,
And halls with her shrill note th' approach of darkening skies.

"O!"  Lucan cries, "where may the two lone maids
Now wand'ring be?  ah!  would to heaven that they
Were wandering here, but he who ever leads
The virtuous, sure, too, them also may
Now lead aright, 'tis so &mdash; my mind doth say
That they are safe; no doubt, some gen'rous knight,
Friend to the lonely, lest to go astray
The wanderers should, doth in his soul delight
To with them hie, and guide their gentle steps aright.

"And let his soul be bless'd whoe'er he be
Great is the mind that guards the succourless:
And sure, young knight, then great in mind is he,
Who would befriend fair maiden in distress"&mdash;
"Yes, great he is," quoth Ozmond, "nothing less&mdash;"
"But hold!  sir knight, what that from yonder part?
The cry of one, if I aright may guess,&mdash;
And seems a maid &mdash; now sudden doth it cease&mdash;
But hark!  it hear again &mdash; come on, we may it trace."

He said; and both together do rush on
Toward where, at times, they hear the mournful cry&mdash;
A tower they reach, but swift the cry is gone&mdash;
Yet did they think it from the tower or nigh:
And silent do they stand awhile hard by,
And often times, too, b'lieve to hear around
The feet of some who did at distance fly&mdash;
Whither they would, when from beneath the ground,
And near the tow'r, is heard again the mournful sound.

"O mourn," it cries, "sad maid, for ever mourn,
For hence how great the woe thou hast to bear!
Ah!  why have I not death, as you, too borne&mdash;
In such, alas!  now 'twould be bliss to share&mdash;
But I must live &mdash; and O, how live! &mdash; despair!&mdash;
They are not near who would me soon defend,&mdash;
But where they are, O gracious heaven!  let there
Thy ever bright and guardian ray descend,
And let them hope &mdash; Yes, hope at least, Oh heaven!  lend."

She ceas'd, and straight the knights rush to the tower,
And doors and all that might them stay soon break,
Nor do they meet one to oppose their pow'r,
As tho' all did ere now th' abode forsake;
And ever they adown their way do make,&mdash;
For from below did seem the mournful plaint&mdash;
A cell is gained &mdash; the knights did not mistake&mdash;
There they beheld lone maid, as tho' in faint;
And cross her snow-white arm her beauteous head was leant.

And, more apart within the lonely cell,
Doth Ozmond soon behold another maid,
In whose fair look did beauty bright once dwell;
But paleness now is o'er that look displayed,
And seems in death the lovely maiden laid:
All senseless on the cold ground doth she lie,
And from her snow white breast, where wound was made,
The blood a way adown doth ever try,
Which sure to see might well cause hardest heart to sigh.

But now the maid first seen awaken'd had&mdash;
Lucan's amazed &mdash; swift to his arms she flew&mdash;
'Twas Merah's self, to find the knight she's glad&mdash;
And now the maiden slain at once all knew.&mdash;
Lucan is wroth, &mdash; and cries, "maid, tell me who
Thee hither brought, and all which since befell&mdash;
Why the base foe the fair Sisserah slew&mdash;
And who beside doth in this tower dwell,&mdash;
This, Merah, if thou wouldst revenge, me speedy tell."

"O!  I will thee, Sir knight, all speedy tell&mdash;
But much it grieves this troubl'd heart of mine,
When I think on what thee, sad maid, befell&mdash;
Yet would that Merah's fate was also thine&mdash;
The storm was o'er, and 'gan the sun to shine,
When we, Sir Knight, did leave the gloomy wood&mdash;
Where sought we long, and long too did repine,
That there no tidings of thee reach us could;
And well our fears did tell that peril meet we should.

"But still we strayed long time, yet still none met,
Save the lone herds that wander'd ev'ry where,
O'er flow'ry mead and plain, now glittering wet
From heaven's show'r, which long on them did bear.&mdash;
At length is lost in heavens bright Phoebus fair,
And 'gin we feel the dew of night decend,
And hear the screechowl's note above in air,
And see the herds aside the brake them bend,
While doth the mournful bird of night her song, too, lend.

"O where!  we cried, may lonely maidens rest?
The wearied herds do bend them 'side the shade,
And with her bow'r the nightly bird is bless'd,
But whither goes the lone and wandering maid?
Alas no where!  we cried, and grieving stray'd
On thro' dark woods and silent valleys still&mdash;
But soon the moon her nightly orb display'd;
Broad she uprose above the western hill,
And 'gan the world around with her bright radiance fill.

"Then we descried from far this aged tower,
And hitherward our wand'ring hasty bent;
But ere 'tis reach'd behold, within a bower,
Is heard the foot of one, who hasty went&mdash;
His arms did sound, &mdash; attentive ear we lent&mdash;
He spake to some, &mdash; we thought the voice was thine&mdash;
Again he spake, and hope delusive sent
Again the thought &mdash; high beats this heart of mine&mdash;
I rush to meet thy arms, but thou wert Carmiline!

"At once the knight we know, and all the sky
Doth hear our shriek &mdash; his joy is passing great&mdash;
And you now love me, Merah, he doth cry,
You, maiden, who for Carmiline, but late,
Did bear such wond'rous wrath and seeming hate&mdash;
But all is passed, and thou wilt come with me
To yonder tower, once more of love to treat&mdash;
So he exulting spake, and presently
Did force us to the tower wherein you do us see.

"Three knights he had, &mdash; they share in merriment;
But he alone doth lead us to this cell,
And faultering words do mark some base intent,
Which now in his base soul doth seem to dwell&mdash;
You light he rais'd the darkness to expel&mdash;
And now he spake as tho' all joy of mind&mdash;
'O, how my soul,' he cries, 'doth inly swell,
You, beauteous maidens, here alone to find&mdash;
That Harnol knew of it!  bear him the news, Oh wind!

"'It sure would touch the haughty hero's heart&mdash;
Yes haughty he &mdash; he would with me contend;&mdash;
But then did not my people soon us part,
In death beneath this arm quick should he bend&mdash;
O that his fate would now him hither send!
In sight of thee I should him instant slay,&mdash;
Yes, Merah, I before thee would extend,
In death, that man, who durst, upon the day,
That I would bear thee off, approach me in the fray&mdash;'

"'Hold here,' Sisserah cries, 'vain tyrant, hold,&mdash;
Doest thou believe to make sad maidens think,
That in the strife thou couldst meet Harnol bold?
Ah fool!  e'en now thy soul would from him shrink&mdash;
When ye did meet, thy life was on the brink
Of ruin, till thy knights did thee relieve&mdash;
Then, boaster, hold, and do not vainly think,
That thou shouldst him have slain, to make us b'lieve,
No, Carmiiine, &mdash; in that 'twere madness to deceive.'

"She said &mdash; and wrath and shame are in his look&mdash;
Wrath is, to be by Harnol late o'ercame,
And here to find lone maid who undertook,
Devoid of fear, to tell to him the same&mdash;
'In that 'twere madness to deceive' &mdash; hence shame
To him arose &mdash; he saw his soul we knew,
And fellest passion doth at once inflame,
On either straight an angry look he threw,
And thus then threat'ning speak, his sword holding to view.

"'Rash maids, ye have my wrath upon you brought,
And shall henceforth in this lone cell abide;
To hold each here, but ev'ry night I thought,
But here now night and day you shall reside&mdash;
Yes from the sight of cheerful sun you hide;
Then learn to fear, and know thy angry lord;
If more ye stir his rage, woe shall betide,
A chastisement more dread it may afford,
Then see me in my wrath!  and see this vengeful sword!'

"He would still more &mdash; but from above one call'd;
Loud was the voice, &mdash; it spoke the soul of fear&mdash;
And Carmiline it hears as tho' appall'd&mdash;
He doth not more as one in wrath appear,&mdash;
But leaves the cell, &mdash; and now alone we 're here:&mdash;
Sisserah cries, 'O let us, maid, be great!
Behold, within that nook, a warrior's spear!
I it can wield &mdash; then shall we death await&mdash;
'Twere well if, in his wrath, he would us both defeat!'

"'O maiden!  how thy soul is great!' I cry;
'But strength alas!  doth Merah's soul decline;
Then teach her, great Sisserah, how to die,&mdash;
Death sounds unpleasant in this ear of mine&mdash;
I can no more' &mdash; we now hear Carmiline&mdash;
And for the spear, at once, the maiden flies&mdash;
Glorious the light that in her looks doth shine,&mdash;
My soul is rais'd &mdash; she marks it in my eyes&mdash;
And, 'Merah, thou wilt nobly die with me,' she cries.

"She can no more &mdash; now Carmiline appears;&mdash;
He troubl'd seems, &mdash; yet in his treacherous look
Th' intent is shown that in his soul he bears&mdash;
The maid it saw, and straight the spear uptook,
And threaten'd death; his pride could not it brook&mdash;
And as in wrath, he did his sword upraise&mdash;
Sisserah sent the spear, nor hop'd for luck;
Alone she wish'd that anger might him seize,
And has that wish &mdash; in death the noble maid be lays!

"I'm fill'd with dread, and trembling do I shriek&mdash;
No hope is left &mdash; he has the spear upta'en&mdash;
And death on ev'ry side my looks do seek,
But now, alas!  they seek for death in vain&mdash;
The tyrant tells me I shall not be slain&mdash;
'Thou must awhile abide with me,' he cries,
And here to stop with thee to-night I mean,
This sword ere long shall also sacrifice
Thee to my wrath, &mdash; perhaps before thy Harnol's eyes.'

"He said, and one 'gain calls him from above;
It was as tho' e'en fear itself did call;
He troubl'd hears, and hasty doth remove,
Me leaving here oppress'd with dread and all
That could a maid in my sad state appal&mdash;
I view Sisserah, she doth breathe no more&mdash;
And I'm alone, my heart from strength doth fall,
The lonely cell I throw my looks all o'er,
And black despair 'gain came, and great the pain I bore.

"O mourn, I cry, sad maid, for ever mourn!
For hence how great the woe thou hast to bear!
Ah why have I not death, as you, too borne?
In such, alas!  now 'twould he bliss to share&mdash;
But I must live &mdash; and oh!  how live &mdash; despair!
They are not near who would me soon defend,
But where they are, O gracious heaven!  let there
Thy ever bright and guardian ray descend,&mdash;
And let them hope &mdash; yes, hope at least, oh heaven!  lend.

"Now Carmiline, I thought to sudden hear,
Return with all his people toward the cell;
And straight my soul is seiz'd with greatest fear&mdash;
I swoon, and 'cross my arm my head down fell;
But short, methinks, the time I so did dwell:
And it was you, sir knight, I next did view&mdash;
The sight doth sadness from my heart repel;
Hence to thy arms it was I willing flew,
And have thee told all what of Carmiline I knew."

She ceas'd &mdash; and Lucan here began to speak,&mdash;
When Ozmond cried, " I hear a foot o'er head
It all too heard &mdash; at once their swords they take,
And, fill'd with hero's wrath, above them led&mdash;
For great their souls, and hence had naught to dread&mdash;
Six knights were in the tow'r, but all ran out,
Yet seeing two alone pursue, quick stay'd;
And now abroad they are, and soon the shout
Of war is rais'd, and mighty blows are laid about.

The foe in equal parts themselves divide:
With Carmiline two knights 'gainst Ozmond fought,
And three apart durst Lucan's strength abide;
And loud soon is the clash of arms they wrought&mdash;
It was as tho' the angry heavens had brought
The strife of elements upon the shore.&mdash;
Not less than death their blows for ever sought&mdash;
And brazen arms, so bright but just before,
Are soon lost to the sight, with blood so cover'd o'er.

First Mervod, sullen hero, yields his life&mdash;
In these lone parts he ever pass'd his days,
And oft he had met in the bloody strife,
But never for his country's sake &mdash; always
For some bad end he did his sword upraise;
Hence Carmiline did take him to his gang&mdash;
But sudden here doth death upon him seize,
From Lucan's sword the fates did o'er him hang;
'Twas 'neath that chief he fell, and loud his armour rang.

Nor young in arms seems Ozmond, hero brave;
He boldly doth withstand the haughty foe;
And death soon from him Clanden does receive,
Headlong he fell beneath a mighty blow&mdash;
To Carmiline the knight it sent, but so
That watchful chief did active from it bend,
That Clanden it receiv'd aslant, and low
In death straight fell &mdash; one groan he did upsend,
Loud as the angry blast, that doth the north sky rend.

To him it was belong'd the aged tow'r;
And in it now he twenty years has told;
The lonely traveller 'gan to fear his pow'r,
And wand'ring maids, whom he would often hold
Here hid in cell, until some hero bold
Would come, them from his hateful thrall to free;
When Carmiline did of him hear, he sold
All what he had of portion'd lands, and he
Came with him here to dwell with chosen banditti.

But when he now in death the knight doth see,
Tho' strong in arms, his soul is filled with fright,
And from the sword of Ozmond doth he flee,
That now began shine dreadest in the fight&mdash;
'Neath Lucan, too, doth fall another knight;
That all with Carmiline from death swift fly,
And hide them in the woods or where they might,
To shun the knights, who after them do hie,
And to the dreaded contest now anew defy.

But so them in the thickest shades they screen,
That long the knights search fruitless ev'ry where,
And now return where all the while has been
The lonely maid, half filled with hope and fear;
But when she sees her friends joy doth her cheer
"Ye come, and come with fame, I know," she cries&mdash;
"So heav'n would have it &mdash; he who lifts his spear
To aid the weak, 'tis said, in fame shall rise,
It never glory to the generous brave denies.

She said, and here they 'bide till morn doth come,
When from the aged tow'r the knights do go,
And raise upon the plain Sisserah's tomb&mdash;
Fair by its side a murmuring stream doth flow,
And all around green shrubs and bowers grow,
Where come at noon the flocks from Phoebus' rays;
And where each night the lonely bird of woe,
Amid the shade her tender song doth raise,
Singing of slighted love, and her sad fate always.

And now all from the maiden's tomb do go,
Elsewhere for more adventures new to try,
Or see if they of Dinah aught might know,
Or in their wanderings Harnol brave come by&mdash;
And fair the sun 'gan rise, and bright the sky,
That to their way the knights them willing gave;
But oft the tear they see in Merah's eye,
When she looks back to where the stream's blue wave,
Doth murmuring pass by Sisserah's lonely grave.

