'Tis night once more; the clouds hang over head,
And darken every plain and vale below;
And gone the sun, while fair the moon instead
Breaks in the west, as wont her lamp to show;
And now doth all the world soon silent grow:
The herds go rest, the birds do cease their song&mdash;
Save that sad one, which, ever filled with woe,
Whether the lonely shades or woods among,
Tells, as to silence, her sweet plaint the whole night long.

And now it is that Dinah and her bard,
Who, since late freed from Prejudeek's fell sway,
Doth ever lend his aidance as reward,
Do 'gain, in quest of Lucan, bend their way.
Nor Harmond and Bandon more from them stay,
But follow, as in mutual love, behind;
And oft, the while, they hear sweet Alvel's Lay;
Who never ceased to cheer sad Dinah's mind,
Either by pleasant song, or counsel good and kind.

And Bandon doth of Harmond now require,
Again the tale of Blanaid to renew.
For he would know what happ'd when, as on ire,
Cuchullin 'gainst the mighty Sirus drew;
Beside, what had that aged man in view,
Who told of Blanaid in the tower confined,
And of the mystic lore which Sirus knew&mdash;
Full soon the bard did call the tale to mind,
And thus 'gan tell, to banish cares and woes unkind.

"Still night hangs o'er Menavia's isle &mdash; the moon
Is seen above, dim gazing from her cloud;
And now the strife has ceased around, and soon
Is heard the moan of those o'ercome &mdash; while loud
The victors shout &mdash; Menavia's chief is proud,
For he hath won; and Blanaid saw her knight,
As tho' in death beneath her sire he bowed&mdash;
But 'twas not so &mdash; his people saw his plight,
And snatched him from the tower, from Sirus' secret might.

"Oh!  who may tell how great is woman's love!
How strong the feeling is of her whose heart
Is mov'd by what fair maiden best may move&mdash;
The soul which claims thro' life a noble part?&mdash;
Sure none! &mdash; Then who can say what is her smart,
Her hill of anguish when she b'lieves him slain&mdash;
Him that she loves! &mdash; O thou, whoe'er thou art,
That such wouldst tell, doest little know how vain
To guess at then, what woman's feeling, &mdash; what her pain.

"Sad on the tower the maiden stands &mdash; her look
Is wild, yet fixed &mdash; alone her fair blue eyes
Do beam as wont:  as tho' bright joy forsook
Not her mild breast &mdash; Thus when the tempest tries
Its gloom o'er heaven, and threatening winds arise,
If far, 'mid all, two lonely stars appear,
The mariner doth bless their native skies,
As he would b'lieve the tempest's wrath not there,
They 'mid the gloom of night do look so bright and fair.

"So beam fair Blanaid's eyes, while all her soul
Is overpowered by what may well o'erpower;
And paleness now doth o'er her fair cheek roll,
And dim what's there. &mdash; Thus blast in evil hour,
Ranging fair vale, or grove, or pleasant bower,
Doth meet a lonely rose, the wood-nymph's care,
And mar its hue &mdash; The maid beholds her flower,
She calls to mind when late it was so fair,
And cruel names that which could dim such beauty rate.

"'Tis so now paleness mars fair Blanaid's cheek&mdash;
She sighs, and Sirus hears her from below,
Where still he guard close by that wheel doth keep,
Which all the time is heard its round to go;
While awful verse he sings portending wo&mdash;
But now he ceas'd and flung his look above,
Where Blanaid sighed &mdash; O sire!  how canst thou throw,
Thy look on her? &mdash; the sight doth thee reprove&mdash;
Yes tell thee thou art one whom nought on earth may move.

"The maiden flings her look adown on him&mdash;
It met his gaze &mdash; at once the guilty man
Recoils from such a sight his visage grim;
He could not bear what at that instant ran
O'er his dark soul &mdash; 'twas pain, and such as can
But ill the wicked bide &mdash; a killing pain
Well known to him of guilty conscience, an
O'erload of crime, that doth so heavy lean,
As tho' to own his guilt it would its wretch constrain.

"And Sirus' crime? &mdash; Oh, it was fellest crime!
The forcing of fair maiden, virtuous, bright,
To one of wealth, but one who thought sublime
Yet never felt &mdash; in sooth, the lowest wight
That breatheth life, tho' claiming every right
To what is high &mdash; Ah!  foolish claim, indeed
Know, wretch, that if thy wealth reached heaven's height,
But yet thy soul or worth, or truth to need,
Then all could not thee gain, save from the fool, one meed.

"And is there one who would be Sirus now,
And would yield Blanaid to the wretch whose store
Is deemed his worth? &mdash; Alas!  there is &mdash; all know,
E'en many such &mdash; creatures of wealth, not more&mdash;
And such with them is matrimony's lore&mdash;
But what avails it, how this realized,
And that it spreads the earth for ever o'er,
'Tis only by the low of soul still prized,
And is, at best, but prostitution authorized.

"The maiden flings her look adown on him&mdash;
It met his gaze &mdash; O maid!  what then thy thought,
Didst thou guess why recoiled that visage grim?
Ah no!  thy soul with innocence is fraught,&mdash;
It ill could tell what pain then guilt had wrought
In Sirus' breast; for innocence believes
All as itself, and ne'er thinks ill of aught;
'Tis he most far from it who ever gives
Best guess to all which does the man who guilty lives.

"Hence Blanaid knew not then what Sirus' pain&mdash;
Nor didst thou, Sirus, know what felt the maid;
But know for thee, as well as him thought slain,
It was she felt. &mdash; O high ensample laid
For all who would be great as you, Blanaid;
For Sirus, tho' he acted cruel, ill&mdash;
Was yet thy sire &mdash; O name revered &mdash; obeyed&mdash;
E'en when tho' owned by one of basest will,
There's something in thy sound which claims affection still.

"And so does Blanaid still behold her sire;
And 'gain he looks, and 'gain he met her gaze&mdash;
And e'en once more he doth recoil &mdash; and ire
Is at his heart &mdash; and on his visage plays
An angry smile; while thus he in him says,
(As turned from the maid,) 'what came across
My soul just then? &mdash; was it remorse? &mdash; always
I feel such pain when avarice doth force
Me on, as now, in crime &mdash; then may it be remorse?'

"It may be &mdash; and it is &mdash; but why should I
Shrink at remorse? &mdash; is Sirus one that's grown
Upright of soul &mdash; and is he leaving by
What crime he knows, and all that he has known?
It is not so &mdash; then this is favour shown
By heaven kind &mdash; it lets me feel what state
Of crime is mine, that hence I may atone&mdash;
But what would it? &mdash; that I beg, &mdash; pray &mdash; intreat&mdash;
Avarice and all renounce &mdash; give Blanaid to the great&mdash;

"This, this, too hard &mdash; heaven, then I make not claim
On favours thine &mdash; I am, and I will be
What still I am &mdash; let those who fear the name
Of heaven, claim from heaven what to me
It offered has; for none shall ever see
Great Sirus change &mdash; But will not punishment
In death o'ertake?  ah!  that I fear &mdash; but stay&mdash;
Is there a heaven &mdash; a god to punish bent?
Sure no, &mdash; such told but man to hold in government.

"Then care I not in crime, my soul, roll on!
This here is heaven &mdash; nor other heaven beside&mdash;
And it is good &mdash; Fear, and Remorse, begone!
Not more ye shall in Sirus' breast abide&mdash;
Go to the fool &mdash; to him whom ye can chide.
But, Avarice, Pride, Wealth, and all that feed
The mind 'with bliss, come, ye, e'er to reside
Within this soul, for such, a heaven, indeed,&mdash;
Nor shall I other claim &mdash; more Sirus does not need.

"He ceased &mdash; and Blanaid's soul, by this, is reft
Of every hope &mdash; she flings her look around&mdash;
None, save Menavia's people, nigh are left&mdash;
Their foe seems fled; and Sirus soon is found
Thoughtful apart &mdash; But lo!  a distant sound!
At once Menavia's people them prepare&mdash;
Their arms are up, &mdash; and 'gain the wheel goes round,
It is the foe &mdash; they see their spears in air&mdash;
Brightening beneath the moon, that doth above them glare.

"Who foremost comes? &mdash; it is that aged man&mdash;
He who Cuchullin warned of Sirus' skill
In magic might &mdash; and he has told he can
O'ercome the same &mdash; yes bring him 'neath his will,
Or make, within short space, his wheel be still&mdash;
But lo!  what he, as reward, doth request,
(And it Cuchullin promised to fulfil,)
Of all the jewels in the tower placed,
To let him have that one which he should deem the best.

"And this Cuchullin deem'd an humble meed
For service high &mdash; behind the ag'd he moves,
Right glad at heart that 'gain he could proceed
To meet the foe, and free the maid he loves.
His knights are near, and each within him proves
A double zeal; but most does gen'rous Lay;
Thro' all his soul a noble passion roves,&mdash;
Such passion as the breast of him doth sway,
Who never feels within but what the valiant may.

"Cuchullin mark'd this in his warrior's eyes,&mdash;
Read all the mighty turnings of his soul,
And purpose high &mdash; 'O Lay is true,' he cries!
'With him alone I could go meet the whole
Of Sirus' knights &mdash; with him, Manevia roll
Before this arm to free the injur'd maid;
But Sirus' pow'r doth hold us controul;
What 'vails it then to have such faithful aid?
Yonder the awful wheel &mdash; O who can free Blanaid?'&mdash;

"But th' aged may, yes he the awful wheel
May stay perforce &mdash; but should the aged fail,
What would Cuchullin?  what! &mdash; then does he feel
Terror at aught, that thus he 'gins appeal
To know what should he do? &mdash; why still assail,
And still &mdash; if life were still not him denied:
'Tis for the coward to shrink when foes prevail,
But is it for the brave? &mdash; is he e'er terrified?&mdash;
No &mdash; when the danger's most, then most he's in his pride.

"So spake the chieftain in himself, and all
His soul works high &mdash; there dwells no thought that's low.
O who would not Cuchullin then him call,
Who would not be as brave, that he might show
A soul thus great?  and let the valiant know,
To have a soul like this his highest fame;
'Tis not thro' strength great prowess to o'erthrow,
One of the beastial tribe might do the same,
It is the warrior's soul that must uplift his name.

"By this that aged man has drawn close nigh
Where Sirus is &mdash; he stops, for powerful spell
Ere now he wrought, 'twas when to heavens high
He flung his look, and rag'd the battle fell.
Sirus beholds him soon; and soon full well
He reads in him what great, what powerful foe
He has to meet &mdash; Above doth darkness swell&mdash;
The shouts arise, and high to heavens throw
Their angry pale, and joins at once the strife below.

"And spears and swords at once on armour ring,
And death, 'mid darkness, o'er the field doth go.
At times the moon her look adown does fling,
Then sudden hides, and sudden then doth throw
Her look again &mdash; But where the aged now,
The sage who threatened Sirus to oppose,
And stop the awful wheel, which still can show
Great pow'r, as late, against its mighty foes,
Where he now while the shouts and clash of arms arose?

"Not mid the noisy throng he can be seen;
In vain Cuchullin's people look around&mdash;
And fallen now they judge him to have been,
And hence despair and gloom among them found;
For dreadful in their ears the dismal sound
Of Sirus' wheel &mdash; but Cuchullin's soul is high:
Again he rushes where the wheel goes round,
But 'gain comes from the tow'r the fearful cry,
And 'gain his people feel as tho' his death were nigh.

"Then why doest thou, Cuchullin, thus rush on
Against such foe? &mdash; There is a valour true
Within the breast that fearless looks upon
Dangers for sake of those belov'd, but who
Will call it such, to madly rush, like you,
Against him who fights not as warlike foe,
And one who did thee late by art subdue&mdash;
True valour in itself can reason show,
But he who rashly fights &mdash; has he true valour? &mdash; no.

"Then stay, young warrior, stay thy ardent speed;
Sad Blanaid from the tow'r doth thee behold&mdash;
Hear the wild shriek, &mdash; 'tis death for her, indeed,
To see thee fall &mdash; stay for her sake &mdash; but hold!&mdash;
A sudden change! &mdash; where now is Sirus bold?
He is not seen &mdash; Menavia's people fly,
And all at once the mystic wheel has told
Its latest round &mdash; alone the aged's nigh,&mdash;
Cuchullin's friend &mdash; and calls the spirit of the sky:

1.
"His wheel has ceas'd, and he has fled;
He fear'd that aid I had in thee,
For whom the hill so drear I tread,
And read the heavens o'er earth and sea.

2.
"But still, kind spirit, still be near,
Lest Sirus 'gain should come in view;
And still by night, the hill so drear,
I'll climb, to read the heavens for you.

3.
"And too for you oft tithe I'll turn
My step to trace the desert, where
I every herb for thee shall burn
That grateful is to spirits of air.

4.
"Cuchullin, let thy knights be bold;
The tow'r holds many a jewel for thee,&mdash;
And all, ere long, thyself may hold,
Save that one jewel that's dear to me.

5.
"But all is o'er &mdash; the foe are gone;
They fear'd the wrath of spirit maligne&mdash;
Behold the tow'r and maiden won!
The fairest jewel, Cuchullin, 's mine."

"He ceased, &mdash; and sudden cheers of victory
Break on the night &mdash; Cuchullin's people gain
The tow'r at once &mdash; their chief doth Blanaid free&mdash;
But she looks sad, as tho' her sire were slain,
Yet was he not &mdash; Her to the shore they've ta'en
With all her jewels &mdash; The aged follows too&mdash;
The sails are rais'd &mdash; and now they 're on the main&mdash;
Cuchullin's proud &mdash; joyous the pleasant crew&mdash;
And fair the winds, and bright in heaven the moon to view.

"And may the winds be fair, and bright the moon,
Till Blanaid gain Cuchullin's friendly shore!
And, maid, they will, &mdash; yes Fate, sure, cannot soon
Again thee press &mdash; at least now all is o'er&mdash;
But 'tis not so &mdash; still thou art to feel more&mdash;
Not yet that aged man has made his claim&mdash;
Why is his look so oft to Blanaid bore?
O fortune!  change what thou doest evil frame&mdash;
Let Blanaid happy speed, and kind thee always name.

"The night is passed, and they have gained the shore&mdash;
Cuchullin's glad &mdash; nor less the maid &mdash; her eyes
On all do joyful beam, but evermore
Upon her knight &mdash; O heaven!  who knowest what ties
Of love there are betwixt two hearts whose sighs
Thus mutual heave, why doest thou look upon
Their star of fate, when darkened in the skies,
Without to bid its gloom of wrath begone?
Sure 'tis no crime for two to feel and think as one.

"But heaven would have it such, or it is hard
To punish where no evil doth abide;
But whether such 'twould punish or reward,
What 'vails it now?  woes must howe'er betide
The noblest pair e'en under heavens wide.&mdash;
O joys, known to so many, where are ye?
Those who have never loved do oft them pride,
As tho' thine own associates to be,
While two that feel alike can but you rarely see.

"The aged, he who Sirus late o'ercame,
Now asks his choice &mdash; The jewels are shown him all,
And oft Cuchullin bids him all to claim.
Since thro' his aidance they to him did fall;
Nor less doth beauteous Blanaid bid withal,
Who blushing stands in all her beauty rare&mdash;
But lo!  what terror doth her quick appal&mdash;
The aged does aloud his choice declare&mdash;
Blanaid's the fairest jewel &mdash; the one that he would bear!

"Cuchullin hears &mdash; upon that aged brow
He marks a threat that spoke no heart of fear,
And all his soul doth feel that which, till now,
It ne'er had felt &mdash; it seemed as ill were near,
And he had much to dread from him who wear
Such threatening look &mdash; but this he bids away,
And doth Cuchullin as himself appear,
Not yielding more to threat which th' aged may
On him bestow &mdash; so valour should itself display.

"'Thou shalt not have the maid,' the hero cries;
'He, who by sleight of compact would possess
That which high justice else to him denies,
Deserveth then nor reward nor redress,
But fine instead, or what may show him less
Deserving aught.  And, Sire, since true thine aid,
If also true the claim thou doest express,
In spite of love and all, thine was Blanaid&mdash;
But, Sire, thy claim is wrong &mdash; thou shalt not have the maid.'

"He said &mdash; and gladness came on Blanaid's cheek;
But th' aged discontent and anger shows;
And from Cuchullin hies, as though to seek
Some lonely part, and there to tell his woes,
Unheard by all &mdash; But soon gay mirth arose
With Blanaid and Cuchullin, joyful pair:
The song, the laugh, and what else jocund goes
At nuptial feast, with them all plenteous were,
As tho' fair Venus held her court of joyance there.

"But now where are ye, joys?  ah sudden fled!
The maid is missed, and darkness fills the air,
And vain their search &mdash; vacant the nuptial bed,
And lone the hall, fair Blanaid is not there.
But who so bold that durst the maiden bear
From him who knew in all the land but one
That might oppose him or by sword or spear&mdash;
This Curigh bold, who oft in battle shone,
And who too ever in the single combat won.

"But now Cuchullin fears not Curigh nigh;
It is that aged man he fears alone&mdash;
He whose dread spell could darken heavens high,
And bear the maid away, to all unknown.
And now the warrior's wrath is sudden grown;
He hurries from his tower with eager mind!
And through dark woods and wilds his way is thrown,
The aged or the maiden fair to find;
And fleet his pace &mdash; nor stays his faithful Lay behind.

"But lo!  thro' woods Cuchullin hies no more&mdash;
Fast bound the warrior is upon the plain&mdash;
He met the maid and him who late her bore
From where their nuptial pleasures held short reign&mdash;
They fought &mdash; but weak Cuchullin to maintain
Him long against strong Curigh in the fight,
For Curigh 'twas who did the maid constrain
To with him hie, and who, as humble wight,
Late overcame the power of Sirus' magic might.

"For he did hear of Blanaid, beauteous maid,
And with Cuchullin went in humble guise,
That he might gain the maiden thro' his aid,
Which so he did, and now fast with her flies
To where his tower; while still Cuchullin lies
All wounded, and upon the plain low bound&mdash;
But Lay is seen, who soon the chief unties;
They late divided when they sought all round,
That sooner might the aged or the maid be found.

"And now refresh'd they hie to seek again,
And traverse many a wood and many a bow'r.
And over many a hill and many a plain,
And lonely part, perhap ne'er trac'd before.&mdash;
But Curigh with the maid has gained his tow'r;
And 'twas that tow'r by which so late we came&mdash;
Now spread with aged moss and ivy o'er;
You heard the birds of prey about it scream,
And saw, behind, its gloomy wood and lonely stream.

"And now oft thro' that wood, and 'side that stream,
At even, would fair Blanaid grieving stray;
Nor always 'lone, &mdash; with her full often came
Ferkertny, Curigh's bard:  he whose sweet lay
Might send the heaviest cares and woes away.
And Blanaid trusts his soul, and all doth tell
Which in her own sad soul e'er wander may:
Now doth she ask if he would think it well,
That she should hie to find where doth Cuchullin dwell?

"And now she would that he himself would go
And find her knight, till she would thro' his means,
Seek, after secret wise, the overthrow
Of him who still her to his arms constrains&mdash;
But thus the bard from such her soul detains:
''Twere rash,' he cries, 'for maid alone to make
Search for her knight o'er lonely hills and plains;
Friends o'er the helpless wanderer forsake;
And he untimely slain doth heaven's vengeance wake.'

"But still such thoughts to Blanaid oft return&mdash;
And now one eve, as in the wood she stray'd,
Afar from all, &mdash; o'er her sad fate to mourn,
She heard the song of one within a shade;
And on the harp meanwhile he sweetly play'd.
Soon Blanaid knew the wild and plaintive song
Of Curigh's bard, for it was ever made
Congenial to the soul where sorrows throng,
And thus now did it pour its strain the wood along.&mdash;

1.
"I saw the poor stranger alone on the plain&mdash;
'Twas night, and the heavens all 'round
Hung heavy and dark o'er the land and the main,
And nought might be heard save the night bird's wild strain,
Or the fall of the river profound.

2.
"At distance the light of the hamlet he spied,
And thither his wanderings hie;
And often, the while, o'er his memory doth glide
A thought of the home where his youth did reside,
And as often his bosom doth sigh.

3.
"But heavier now the sad wanderer's woe&mdash;
The hamlet his grievance doth spurn,
And he, as an outcast, forsaken must go&mdash;
O curse on the feelings that ever could so,
And leave the poor stranger to mourn!"

"The maid has heard, and now the bard is seen&mdash;
'Hither,' she cries, 'to tell one tender tale
Of her whose soul as mine has wounded been,
That while at her great grievance I do wail,
I may forget what woes this breast assail&mdash;'
The bard consents, and wakes his harp again;
And oft the while doth look to Mucruss' vale,
Beheld not far from where they now remain,
Then pours to Blanaid's soul, beneath the shade, his strain.

LORAH AND CLOUDIN CLIM.
In sooth, it is as lovely hour
As e'er yet hung o'er nightly bower;
'Tis stillness all and far in night,
And 'bove the moon is shining bright;
And every orb and every star,
That e'er o'er heavens seen wandering are,
Now fling adown their beauteous beams,
Bright on vales of flowers and streams:

But, Mucruss, most of all on thee,
As thou the fairest vale to see:
But, lovely vale, tho' fair art thou,
The fairest, sure, e'er seen till now;
Or still what shows thee, Mucruss, more&mdash;
Art fairer now than e'er before&mdash;
Yet 'tis not all thy bowers or streams
That win the sight of Heaven's beams.
Still these as fair as ever spright
Did trace at silent hour of night;
Or yet as sweetest bid of song
Did send his notes of love along&mdash;
In sooth, as fair as ever moon
At midnight saw, or sun at noon;
But fairer, Mucruss, still than these,
What now yon beaming heaven sees.
And lo 'tis she who yonder leads
Her wandering thro' thy flowery shades&mdash;
O what before, sweet vale, wert thou,
If e'er before as fair as now?
Sure loveliest form, from shades divine,
Came down to wander then thro' thine,
And fill with love all breasts below&mdash;
Such love as spirits of heaven may know&mdash;
If so then thou as fair before,
As now thou art &mdash; perhaps e'en more&mdash;
But if not so, sure, Mucruss, thou
Wert never half so fair as now.

But whither would the lonely maid?
Is not that soul of aught afraid,&mdash;
Does it believe that all may see
Those looks which beam so lovingly,
And still all feel that virtuous glow,
Which but so few alone can know,
When beauteous form they look upon&mdash;
Such form as 'wakes the thrill that one
Doth feel when eyes of love appal,
If he hath soul to feel at all&mdash;
Is this its b'lief? &mdash; if, maiden, so&mdash;
Then learn that vain such b'lief below&mdash;
That few the souls of mortal bliss,
Who're born, alas to feel like this:
And, Lorah, you, with all thy charms&mdash;
Those breasts of love and snow white arms,
And eyes more fair than eastern gem&mdash;
Sure well may heaven look on them&mdash;
E'en you there are who'd lead astray,
So few but customed to betray.
Then whither would the lonely maid?
Is not that soul of aught afraid?
If not wherefore, at times, the sigh,
And wistful look, and fearful eye?
Sure these bespeak a soul which knows
At least some fear of threatening woes?
Alas 'tis so! &mdash; And, maid, this night&mdash;
Tho' now the heavens shine o'er thee bright,
And every star which eye can see
Flings down its purest ray round thee,
As tho' thy lonely step to guide
From where may evils thee betide&mdash;
Still, maid, this night hang sorrows nigh
Which soon must doom thy joys to die.
Yes Lucus' blood, &mdash; fell Lucus slain,&mdash;
Doth call for vengeance not in vain;
High heaven does own that vengeance due,
And, Lorah, part must fall on you,
And part on him who Lucus slew.
But tho' 'tis so great heaven decrees,
With pity, maiden, still it sees
That thou art doomed such woful plight,
And hence its beams on thee to-night&mdash;
Beams which, tho' angry looking down,
Do still wear sadness in their frown,
That one of form, so lovely fair,
Should destined be their wrath to bear,
And know of all the heavy woe,
Which but the dark of soul ought know.
But did high heaven thee fairer see,
Still would it, maid, impartial be&mdash;
'Tis not for beaming looks or eyes,
To turn just vengeance from the skies;
And Lucus' blood there's vengeance due,
And, Lora, part must fall on you
And part on him who Locus slew.

'Twas far in Mucruss' woody bowers,
That rose proud Kaiman's lofty towers;
He, who, for far, could show command,
Nor knew of peer in all the land,
Or in rich store, or powerful sway,
For so would fame alike display
Great Kaiman's worth &mdash; and lo!  remains
But one t' inherit all his plains;
And Lorah 'tis &mdash; the maid whose eyes
Caused love with many a youth to rise;
While she, of all who looked upon
Her beauteous form, ne'er knew but one,
With whose fond eyes her own would roll,
And tell the wanderings of her soul&mdash;
Such as the look of her would tell,
Whose breast when first young love doth swell,
Soon owns it hard the pain t' abide&mdash;
Yet loath to tell, but more to hide
Oft on the youth her eyes doth fling,
To speak her soul's sad wandering.

And Cloudin Clim was named the youth
Whom Lorah loved, and who, in sooth,
Too lov'd the maid &mdash; but, hapless pair,
What 'vails it now that ye thus share
In mutual wish, &mdash; that Cloudin Clim
But Lorah loves, and she but him,&mdash;
Since he alone shall have the fair,&mdash;
Who best the strife of arms can bear?
Yes so would Kaiman proud resign
The last of all his ancient line,
That none might have the maiden save
Him who is bravest of the brave.

And now is heard the bugle's sound,
Loud call the youth of all around,
Who would obtain, thro' deeds of arms,
Young Lorah in her bloom of charms;
And soon the youth all hear its call,
But Cloudin Clim more soon than all,
Who comes, as tho' right glad to prove
How great for Lorah is his love.
But did young Cloudin only know
One half that pain which now doth grow
In Lorah's breast for him alone,
Lest should he be this day o'erthrown,
And she be snatch'd from him afar,
When only he was dear to her&mdash;
Yes did but half young Cloudin know,
He would not then of gladness show;
Even tho' much alone might prove
How great for Lorah was his love.

Now has the bugle ceas'd to sound,
And stand the youth in arms all round,
And wait alone the signal word,
When shall a knight, with spear or sword,
Come forth to call him on to fight,
Who durst dispute the maid his right.
And, meanwhile, in her loveliness,
But grief of soul and tenderness,
Is Lorah seen by Kaiman's side&mdash;
In sooth a sad and trembling bride,
Whose eyes 'mid all are wildly thrown,
And yet can find but one alone,
That e'er they care to light upon,
And still young Cloudin Clim that on.
Nor by the youth is this unseen&mdash;
He marks it, and his soul's between
Two mighty fires &mdash; now love doth stir,
And now an eager thirst for war,
That he, from all, thro' martial deed,
May bear the maiden as his meed.
And ne'er young Cloudin knew before
What love his breast for Lorah bore;
Nor, Lorah, maiden fair, didst thou
E'er know what love thy breast, till now,
Didst bear before for Cloudin Clim&mdash;
And still thy gaze, is flung on him,
And still the youth doth meet thy gaze&mdash;
And 'gain a double fire doth seize
Upon his wild, half wandering soul,
While his blue eyes with thine do roll;
Which, sure, may tell what thoughts arise
And swell within, if ever eyes,
Or look of lover yet might tell
What thoughts unknown his soul did swell.

But lo!  the signal word is given&mdash;
When sudden, as by thousands driven,
Young Cloudin, from the martial train,
Has hurried single on the plain&mdash;
And Lorah's eyes as soon are there,
As still upon the youth to stare;
But so they cannot now remain&mdash;
Swift 'mid the throng they're flung again,
As they would see who is the knight
That does prepare him for the fight.
But many a knight is seen around,
Who now is mail fast on him bound,
And who the while names Cloudin Clim,
And, too, oft throws a look on him,
Which seems to say, "it madness were
For knight so young the strife to dare."
But one is seen, o'er all the rest,
Of bull-hide targe and horse-hair crest;
Whose sullen brow doth wear a frown,
And whose red eye is looking down,
That seems he, as he e'er before,
In wood, or on some mountain hoar,
Did spend his day afar from men,
There in a savage, lonely den;
And, as the forest Indian rude,
The wild beast for his garb and food&mdash;
Scarce was it else &mdash; this Lucus fell,
A man of whom did all hear,
But who so ever past his days,
In woods, and wilds, and lonely ways,
That rarely was he seen till now,
Save when afar on mountain brow,
He chased the she-wolf or the boar,
Or stalked some plain or valley o'er.

And he, too, as the knights around,
His heavy mail now on him bound,
And oft the while names Cloudin Clim,
And oft too flings a look on him,
Which seems to say, "it madness were
For knight so young the strife to dare."
This Lorah sees, and o'er her soul
A thousand terrors sudden roll&mdash;
"O may," she cries, "some other knight
Oppose young Cloudin in the fight&mdash;
He could not 'scape from Lucus tall,
He's sure of strength too great for all,
And seems more like to savage man,
Bred up in desert mid some clan,
Than one with other mortals bred,
Who should alone claim maiden's bed"&mdash;
She said, and fearful looked on him,
And then once more on Cloudin Clim.
But he no fear of Lucus shows,
For high his soul now in him rose;
And oft he looks amid the crowd,
And oft too calls, with voice aloud,
Him who durst boldly meet the strife,
To gain the maid at risk of life.
And now tall Lucus caught his eye,
As shook his horse-hair crest on high;
And straight he bids him to the fight,
If he would claim the maid his right.
But nought doth answer Lucus fell,
Tho' high his soul does in him swell,
And wears his sullen brow its frown,
And his red eye is looking down;
That seems he as terrific now,
As whene'er yet on mountain brow,
He chased the she-wolf or the boar,
Or stalked some plain or valley o'er.
And why then Cloudin's call refuse,
Whose soul hence courage doth infuse,
Threefold more great than e'er before?
And Lorah's eyes on his, once more,
Do joyful beam, as tho' to say,
Love, heaven now is kind, and may
With fear thus fill the foes of thine,
And leave thee, free from peril, mine.
But lo!  e'en now that hope is past,
For sudden the shrill bugle's blast
Is heard, from mid the martial train,
Announce a knight upon the plain,
Young Cloudin in the strife t' oppose,
And claim the maiden as his spouse.

And now their swords already rise;
And round for far are heard the cries
And shouts of those who're looking on,&mdash;
And 'mong the rest sad Lorah's one,
Whose shuddering soul is all a thrill
Of hopes and terrors, such as fill
The soul when it believeth nigh
That instant in whose space must lie
A scene of all its future bliss,
Or what it deems its wretchedness.
And strong the foe of Lorah's knight;
One, who, alone to show his might,
And not to win the maiden's love,
His strength with Cloudin Clim's would prove;
And he was come from distance far,
And ever sought, as now, the war,
That he might show, in every place,
Him worthy of his lady's grace,
Who thus did send him late to rove,
And thro' his fame to win her love.
And now he had long journey gone,
And much of fame too ever won,
When he did hear of Lorah fair,
And hither came the strife to share.
And now 'tis in its anger high&mdash;
The sparks from shields and helmets fly&mdash;
And points of swords are broke or bent,
And wide their armour bright is rent;
And each doth bend him, in the fight,
Beneath their blows, e'er sent aright,&mdash;
Now Cloudin, now the stranger knight.
And all the while the shouts and cries
Are heard around the field to rise;
And Lorah's still among the rest,
With hopes, and fears, and doubts oppress'd&mdash;
But mark!  she sees her knight to gain,
And press his foe back on the plain&mdash;
But even now that scene is gone&mdash;
And lo!  the stranger knight comes on,
With wrath more great than e'er before,
And high a blow he lifts, which o'er
The casque of Cloudin bold doth come&mdash;
As when the thunder's bolt, o'er some
High tow'r's top, or mountain brow,
Comes threatening ruin vast below&mdash;
And vain for Lorah's knight to rear
His shield the vengeful shock to bear,
Full on his helmet doth it rest,
And midway burst it from the crest;
Then near his temple, from the crown,
Swift came aslant all heavy down;
That now within he dizziness feels;
And oft he stares, and oft he reels,
As tho' he to the knight would yield,
And leave him victor of the field.
Meanwhile emotion sad and wild,
Speaks thee, sad maid, of all beguil'd&mdash;
'Tis thy fixed look &mdash; thy blue eye's stare&mdash;
Tho' not one tear is starting there&mdash;
That such to all can too well speak&mdash;
Nor less than these thy trembling cheek,
And quivering lip, and humid brow
May speak th' emotion with thee now.
And still around the shouts and cries
Of victory near, are heard to rise
Nor are they for thy Cloudin, &mdash; no&mdash;
They for the stranger knight, his foe,
Who now comes on of victory sure,
When, Cloudin, ill may'st thou endure
Such rival great &mdash; but born that heart
To act e'en now the hero's part&mdash;
Already death seems o'er thee raised,
And yet no fear has on thee seiz'd&mdash;
Art still so brave &mdash; but hope is past&mdash;
Thou doest half sink &mdash; on Lorah last
Thy look would be &mdash; as thou wouldst tell
What love for her, e'en now, doth swell
Thy parting soul &mdash; and bid a long farewell&mdash;
And now she meets thy awful gaze
But what upon thee, knight, doth seize?&mdash;
Spirit to aid sure is not nigh,
And dwells there magic in that eye,
Or what may fallen man restore?
O Claudin!  why not look before?
Not longer now thy soul doth shrink,
Nor seemest thou upon the brink
Of peril great, as late wert thou
When its last gaze thy look would throw
Upon those eyes, beloved e'en then,
And which too lov'd the strongest when
Thy every hope did seem no more&mdash;
But this, young knight, at length is o'er&mdash;
And now for thee are heard the cries,
And now thy soul and Lorah's rise;
Then, stranger, vain thy strength to try&mdash;
Again he looks, and 'gain his eye
Doth meet with hers, and hope is high.
But thou art distant far from her,
Whose eyes thus to the strife might stir.
And now all weak thou doest appear,
Nor for thee more is heard the cheer,
While Cloudin lifts the conquering blow&mdash;
But hold thee, knight, great is thy foe,
Yet may not now that blow abide,
Then sad if death should him betide&mdash;
O look once more on Lorah's eyes!
They wish not thus thy wrath to rise&mdash;
All sad they view the stranger knight&mdash;
Oh look!  ere yet thy sword may light&mdash;
But thou doest not &mdash; then all is past&mdash;
In death the stranger's doom is cast&mdash;
Far from his plains he falls at last.

Again the bugle shrill doth swell&mdash;
But long it were now all to tell,
That Cloudin fought the maid to gain&mdash;
At length none seem upon the plain,
Who will, to meet him in the fight,
Dispute fair Lorah as his right.
And now for him arise the cheers,
And now o'erjoy'd the maid appears,
And b'lieves young Cloudin solely hers,
Nor fear of aught that b'lief e'er stirs.
Nor less the knight doth her believe&mdash;
But when may not one's hope deceive?&mdash;
A gloom o'er all e'en now is cast,
For sudden the shrill bugle's blast
Again is heard from mid the train,
Announce a knight upon the plain,
Young Cloudin in the strife t' oppose,
And claim the maiden as his spouse.
And who is he? &mdash; Long Cloudin bore
The strife, that now his strength seems o'er,
And ill may he fresh knight abide,
His wounds so many and so wide&mdash;
Then who the foe? &mdash; one o'er the rest
Of bull-hide targe and horse-hair crest,
Whose sullen brow doth wear a frown,
And whose red eye is looking down&mdash;
Yes Lucus this, &mdash; and all the day
Intent he held him from the fray,
That when young Cloudin's strength grew weak,
He might more sure for victory seek.
And now he lifts his sullen brow,
And flings his red eye round him now,
And oft too wields his sword on high,
And oft too Cloudin doth defy&mdash;
But what, ill fated knight, canst thou?&mdash;
Still from thy wounds the blood doth flow,
And shattered is thy armour wide,
And weak and faint art thou beside&mdash;
And lo!  thy foe's advancing now,&mdash;
Oh what, ill fated knight, canst thou?&mdash;
Sad Lorah hides her from the sight,
And all, save thee, seems filled with fright;
But thou art valiant to the last&mdash;
Yet 'tis as nought &mdash; lo all is past!&mdash;
Thy strength 'gainst Lucus fell was vain&mdash;
He leaves thee bound upon the plain.

And great is now sad Lorah's grief&mdash;
But what may lend the maid relief?&mdash;
Fell Lucus does not see those tears,
And her, in spite of all, he bears
To where his gloomy mansion stood
Far 'mid the darkness of a wood.

And here did Lorah now reside
One winter and fair summer's tide;
And oft the while would Lucus lead
Her thro' dark wood, and wild, and glade,
To chase with him the wolf or boar;
And often, too, bleak mountain o'er,
And other lonely parts they strayed&mdash;
And still fair Lorah was a maid.

And now one eve, as they did fling
Thro' lonely ways their wandering,
It happ'd the chase did them divide,
And soon apart they wander wide;
Tall Lucus on the mountain brow,
And Lorah in the woods below.
And now she hies, she knows not where,
Through many a bower and arbour fair;
And soon the close of eve appears,
And soon the wild beast's howl she bears
That doth from his thick covert break,
Amid the night his food to seek.
And as she thus lone bower did stray,
Behold one stands athwart her way,
Of stately form, in martial guise,
Who steadfast flings on her his eyes,
And whom she doth all trembling view,
When lo!  to her he sudden flew&mdash;
And she now to the arms of him,
As tho' he were her Cloudin Clim.
Nor was it else &mdash; To seek the maid.
Thus oft at evening hour he stray'd
By where did Lucus dwelling find,
And now all glad he is at mind,
To meet her thus in lonely bower,
And far apart from Lucus' power.
But can he from the knight her bear,
Who may o'ertake, or find out where
His Lorah shall be from him ta'en;
If so, then, Cloudin, 'twould be vain
From Lucus' claim the maid to shield,
His prowess won her on the field.
But darker thought than this doth rest
Alas!  within young Cloudin's breast!
And Lorah hears his fell intent,
Nor doth the maiden it prevent;
So few there are who blindly love,
But would, at every risk, remove
Whatever may their wishes bar&mdash;
Such wishes as with lovers are&mdash;
And with the maid, alas, 'tis so
Who now gives Cloudin all to know:
How he may enter unespied
Where Lucus doth alone reside;
And how upon his arms then seize,
And come to where he sleeps always;
With what beside that he would know,
Or help to Lucus' overthrow.

And now he hies where one doth dwell,
Whose thoughts, he knew, were dark and fell,
And who would willing, in the night,
Lend aidance 'gainst great Lucus' might;
And Lorah he requests to bide
Within the bowers till midnight tide,
When she in death the foe should see,
And hence the spouse of Cloudin be.
Hence 'tis to night, thro' Mucruss' shades,
Alone the maid her wandering leads,&mdash;
But now 'tis past lone midnight tide,
Till when she was the youth to bide,
And oft her soul doth doubt if he
O'ercame in night his enemy.
And, maiden, hence, at times that sigh,
And wistful look, and fearful eye,
Whilst thou, as faery form all bright,
Doest move thro' Mucruss' arbours light,
And heaven, as tho' it lov'd to see
Such beauteous form, still beams on thee.

But lo!  a stir from distant part,
Which brings sad boding to her heart.
It seems to be the foot of one
Who thro' the bow'rs swift rushes on.
And now he stops, as tho' to view
If aught behind his pace pursue;
And now his breath doth quick retain,
As tho' to list &mdash; and then again
Swift thro' the bowers rushes on,
As still he fearful fled from one.
But 'twas not so, &mdash; he's seen at last,
And sudden Lorah stands aghast&mdash;
'Tis Lucus, sure, she, in her, cries,
For that his mighty form and size,
And that his brow of sullen frown,
And that his red eye looking down&mdash;
But yet not so &mdash; again she cries&mdash;
More huge that mighty form and size,
And dark that brow of sullen frown,
And wild that red eye looking down,
Than ever gloomy Lucus bore,
Or mortal, sure, did see before.

She can no more; the knight doth stand
Before her now &mdash; he takes her hand,
And silent with him leads her on
Thro' many a bow'r and arbour lone,
And many a plain and mountain o'er,
Which Lorah never traced before;
And all the while they hear no stir,
Save that which comes from him and her.
As thro' the lonely ways they stray,
For never word the knight doth say,
Nor can the maid e'en ask him why,
He so apart with her did hie&mdash;
But oft she mutters Cloudin Clim,
Then fearfully looks up to him,
As tho' to ask whence did he wend.
And whether Cloudin's foe or friend&mdash;
But never doth the knight reply,
And still thro' loneliest ways they hie,
Until, at length, they reach a wood,
Where now the gloomy stranger stood,
And on the maid his look swift threw&mdash;
And dread it was that look to view&mdash;
Its brow a heavier frown did wear.
And its red eye more wild did stare,
Than when the maid did first it see,
And thought it Lucus' self to be.&mdash;

Sad maid!  he cries and, as he spoke,
His dark red eyes more fearful look&mdash;
Sad maid, ask not for Cloudin Clim,
He Lucus slew, and I slew him.
On me he call'd to do the deed,
And profered much of gold for meed&mdash;
And I did aid, but golden fee
I would not, maid, prefer to thee,
Wherefore, as late we hasty drew
Nigh Mucruss' bowers, for love of you,
This arm thy knight, thy Cloudin slew.
But why so look, and why so start?&mdash;
There's nought ignoble in the part,
But must with Cloudin Clim remain,
He has unjustly Lucus slain:
And thou wert Lucus' spouse by right&mdash;
He won thee in the field of fight&mdash;
But Lorah was as lawful mine,
As, Cloudin, she was ever thine.
Then did I aught ignobly do?&mdash;
He lov'd thee, maid, and I lov'd too&mdash;
And when two knights one maiden love,
'Tis fit that arms their claim should prove.
Hence art thou mine, and long shalt be&mdash;
I bide within the wood you see,
And head, as chief, an outlaw band,
Whom terror speaks of o'er the land;
Then am I, maid, well known to fame,
And Kaiman oft has heard my name&mdash;
Yes oft has heard of Clandus, great
For rebel sway and warlike feat.&mdash;
Then be not sad, since thou hast found
One, as thy sire, in arms renowned&mdash;
But true, oft time, those eyes shall see
What ill may now accord with thee&mdash;
The ravish'd maid &mdash; the traveller ta'en,
And robb'd of all his wealth or slain&mdash;
The just oppress'd, and for no cause
But t' have maintain'd their country's laws&mdash;
The night in rudest revel spent,
Or forming plan of fell intent,
Far in that wood, from every sight,
Where sunniest day doth seem as night&mdash;
Yes true, that such full oft they'll see&mdash;
But, yet, among the brave you'll be;
And as thy sire would thee bestow
Upon the bravest, 'twill be so,
For none shall have thee, maiden, save
Him who is bravest of the brave.

He ceas'd, nor did the maid all hear,
Now so possess'd of every fear.
She feels that heaven hath angry sent
Adown its spirit of punishment,
For Lucus by young Cloudin slain,
And that to hope for aught is vain.
Hence doth she wildly look and stare&mdash;
Now on the knight, now every where,
As tho' all sense hath fled her quite&mdash;
But lo!  she's seiz'd amid her fright,
And borne into that wood afar.
Where never yet beam'd sun or star,
And Clandus' gloomy people are.
And still when heaven's all dark to view,
If what old legends tell be true,
Full oft about that wood have been
Tall Clandus and his people seen,
And Lucus' ghost of visage grim,
And Lorah and young Cloudin Clim.

"The bard here ceas'd, and left the maid alone
Still in that shade, that she might dwell on all
Which hath in Lorah's tale been fitly shown,
Lest should one day the like to her befall.
And doth she now it o'er and o'er recall,
And wisest counsel doth her breast e'er fill,
That she is bent no more to be the thrall
Of passion fell, but such henceforth to still;
And learn to bear what doth all gracious heaven will.

"Such now her thoughts, and just her thoughts now were,
But are they always? &mdash; ah!  why that require?&mdash;
Here let me cease &mdash; for ill this soul can bear
To tell thee more &mdash; it should but grieve or tire&mdash;"
He said, &mdash; but this awakens the desire
Of Bandon much, to know what did ensue,
That Harmond doth again uptake his lyre,
And, as they on their way still journey do,
He briefly thus the tale of Blanaid doth pursue&mdash;

"The clash of arms is heard within the tower,
And many knights come from afar are there&mdash;
But where the knights of Curigh in such hour,
They are not seen with him the strife to dare!
Ah no!  for now far off the wandering were&mdash;
And Blanaid 'twas who had devised it so
Ere she'd found means Cuchullin here to bear,
For he and all his knights are now the foe
That high, in Curigh's hall, uplift the mighty blow.

"And Curigh falls &mdash; the valiant is no more,&mdash;
And Blanaid hastes with her own knight away&mdash;
With him, whose soul now every joyance bore,
That he, at length, did mighty Curigh slay,
And find the maid &mdash; nor less his knights display.
Meanwhile o'er Curigh's tow'r doth hang a gloom&mdash;
And there alone is heard the mournful lay
Of his ag'd bard, who has uprais'd his tomb,
And told, in tender tale, his deeds for days to come.

"Meanwhile Cuchullin and the maiden gain
Their destined home, and b'lieve ills gone at last.
And now with them doth every pleasure reign
That e'er young joyous Hymen yet hath cast
Round nuptial bed:  the day in bow'rs is past,
The night in cheerful hall, where bards sweet song,
Or music, e'en of heavenlier strain possess'd,
Doth steal, as tho' unfelt, all hearts among,
Until, unwares, mid thrill of bliss they find them flung.

"But may such pleasure long with them abide?&mdash;
They b'lieve such may &mdash; And now one even fair,
As 'broad they wander'd 'mid their bowers wide,
To feel, as wont, what sweets of even were,
They came, at length, from straying far, to where
An aged rock hung o'er steep precipice,
From which to look was sight, I ween, most drear&mdash;
And on its verge a bard now seated is,
Who ever did attune his harp to lover's bliss.

"And doth his song delight fair Blanaid's ear&mdash;
But now so low he sings his tender strain,
That whence the maiden stands she ill may hear,
And hence doth nigher move &mdash; but now again
His strain's more low, and still the maid is fain
To hear the song, and still doth draw more nigh,
Until she is, at length, where he doth lean
Half o'er the steep &mdash; the knight too stands close by&mdash;
And both now 're on the rock, above the fall so high.

"And soon full well they hear the bard's sweet song&mdash;
But lo 'tis chang'd, and bodes of something ill&mdash;
Now 'tis abrupt, &mdash; now wild, &mdash; now low, &mdash; now strong&mdash;
And doth, the while, full oft of terror fill;
Yet do the knight and maiden hear it still,
As tho' it had the pow'r of mystic spell,
And held them there enwrapped against all will,&mdash;
And oft the bard's strange look on Blanaid's fell,
Yet so he does that Blanaid's ne'er on his may dwell.

"And now the fall of Curigh is his theme,
As tho' he nor the knight, nor maiden knew;
And while they all attentive hear the same,
Behold!  as tho' it were by stealth, he drew
Him backward from the verge, until he view
Either between him and the ruinous fall&mdash;
And still he sings, and now his eyes he threw
Upon the maid, that soon she doth recall
Who is the bard, and seems as fill'd with terror all.

"Such terror 'twas as guilty breast doth know,
When 'fore the upright, who its soul can tell&mdash;
For this now Curigh's bard, who us'd forego
Oft many an hour, fair Blanaid to counsel
From what was wrong; hence terror so doth swell
Now in her breast &mdash; and to the knight she clung
Thro' fear unknown &mdash; his arms around her dwell&mdash;
Ah hapless pair! &mdash; This instant on them sprung
The bard, and with him down the steep each headlong flung.

"Hence, Bandon, Curigh's fall had vengeance due,
The knight and maid are found in death below&mdash;
And that aged bard, alas!  has suffered too&mdash;
He lov'd his lord, and for his overthrow
Would vengeance take &mdash; and heaven had it so.
Henceforth the tow'r of Curigh is found 'lone&mdash;
And there, 'tis told, he's seen at night to go,
And that fair Blanaid, too, is with him shown,
Or heard within the wood to make, as wont, her moan."

Here ceas'd the bard, and Bandon's soul doth change,
It does not muse, as late, on crime aught more.
And now thro' lonely parts they still do range;
And Dinah still and Alvel go before;
And all the way they mutual converse bore.
But who is he whom now they sudden see?
The maiden swift flies to his arms, and o'er
Her beauteous cheek the tears flow plenteously&mdash;
Such would in height brave Lucan seem &mdash; say who is he?

