Be patient, Good Neighbours, and hear
What I shall unfold you anon,
A Trip to Bartholomew-Fair,
By Nathaniel, Thomas, and John.

Scarce had the Burning Phoebus roll'd his Carr
Down to the Margen of the Western Skies,
Nor had the Hour of Liberty approach'd
Wish'd by the Turnkeys Flock, and Hackney Scribes
E'er Scrowler and Hackero (Names as yet
Unknown to Fame, but Treasur'd in my Lines)
Shall stand confest to Ages yet unborn.

Prickt with a keen Impatience, up they furl
Long Scrolls of Parchment, and their Pens dismist,
Rest undisturbed in their Sable Sockets.
Then issuing forth, they jostle obvious Crowds,
Disdain the Chance of Shuffle-Board, nor stay
To cheapen Fruits, the Blessings of Pomona,
Till they have found a Third to share their Fortunes,
By Men Scriblero call'd, a doughty Hero.

Thus met, a Pause ensu'd, till Scrowler first
With Phiz of antient Guise, and Form antique,
Broke Silence&mdash;

Arise my Friends, nor here inglorious stay,
Forget a while the aking Thoughts of Thraldom,
And search, advent'rous, for the Gifts of Pleasure.

Not far from gloomy Newgate's Sable Tow'rs,
Where Iron-Bars enclose imprison'd Captives,
There lies a wide extended Plain, yclept
Smithfield, well known to Castor's weary Sons.
'Tis now the Time of general Rendezvous,
From garter'd Knights  to the ungarter'd Shoe-boy,
To taste the Pleasure that the Fair affords;
Let's there agree to go. &mdash; So said, so done,
They sally forth with mutual Consent.

But (Muse) pass o'er the various Shocks they met,
The Pavements Jostles, and the Kennels Dirt,
Till thou shalt view them safe arriv'd in Smithfield.

Here various Objects strike their ravish'd Senses,
The Eyes, the Ears, the Nose, the Tast, the Touch;
Here curling Smokes in od'rous Volumes rise,
At once informing both their Eyes and Nose,
That some more fav'rite Sense be gratify'd,
Thither they press intent &mdash; So a staunch Hound,
When in the Morning Dew his subtle Nose
Has catcht the chearing Scent, he onward scours
With Voice elate,  while every obvious Breeze
Informs his liquorish Jaws of sweet Repast.
Our Heroes view the Iron-Vessels fraught
With fat Libations, which the hungry Jaws
Of Mortal Wights devour, but, like the Gods,
Content with Heads reclin'd, they snuff the Steam.

Here a long Visto opens to the View,
Stor'd with the glittring Wares of Birmingham,
There Shoals of Oysters (Food delicious) lie,
Which, fresh, inforce the English Husband's Vigour,
Impow'r th' Hybernian Hero to discharge
His frequent Duty to his Patroness,
And, tainted, gratifie the Gallick Taste.

Mean while the Trumpet Clangor, and the Drums,
Fill the wide Welkin with their Martial Airs,
While Bagpipes, Fiddles, Salt-Box, Kettle-Drums,
Shaums, Jews-Trumps, Tabors, Whistles, Rattles, all
Join their discordant Notes to fill the Choir.

Modell'd by Pallas Aid, large Structures raise
Their Wooden Fabricks, lin'd with num'rous Crouds,
Expectant of the Shews to be perform'd;
While, to amuse the gaping Crouds without,
Heroes and Heroines, and Demi-Gods,
(Apparell'd in the Mode that Poets feign)
Mounted aloft in long Ovation Stalk.

Others, with em'lous Care to please the Mob,
(Sole Umpire) on a slacken'd Cord expose
A pendant Youth, whose agil Limbs amaze
Spectators; pleas'd to see how well our Race
Reprizals make on Pugg's audacious Sons,
By mimicking of them, as they do us.

Some distance mounted on a Stage appear
The well-known Peachum, Lockitt, and Mackheath.
Here Nature, more than Art, has fram'd the Men
Really to personate the Characters.
Here Scribler spoke, Behold (my Friends) these Men
Will not deceive your Senses, you may read
Rogue, Knave and Robber in their Faces plain;
For in the Entertainments of the Stage,
We learn they act the best who're fram'd by Nature.

But whilom as the pious Trojan Prince
Was nought avail'd by Wisdom, Arts or Arms,
To gain Admittance to the Shades below,
Had not the Golden Bough spoke stronger Terms
Than could be utter'd by the Goddess' Son.
So here no Worth, no Excellence commands
Admittance for the Heroes of my Song,
Till Regal Face imprest on glittring Oar,
From Silent, but Expressive Lips, commands
Unquestion'd Entrance.  In they go jocund
From loftiest Emminence survey the Crowd,
Look down upon the Powder'd Dons below,
And hug themselves, well pleas'd with cheap Ambition.

Anon the envious Curtain's drawn, and Lo
The Actors now advance upon the Stage;
When brave Mackheath recites his Feats of Honour,
What Bosom beats not in his glorious Cause?
What tender Maid can view his soft Amours,
And not begrudge his Polly of the Bliss?
None but the rigid Criticks will enquire,
Why such sincere and constant Passion's plac'd
On such a scoundrel Villain as Mackheath,
Senseless of Gratitude, and [illegible] urge
That Newgate's horrid Gloom, and Iron Grates,
Yield but an Aukward Scene for soft Desires.
When poor Mackheath's betray'd, the Audience kind
Bemoan his luckless hap, so well has Gay
Temper'd the Moving Scene, that ugly Vice,
Ingratitude, and Lust engage our Favour.

The Candles now burn low, the City-Dame
Has quite exhausted all her Cordial-Vial,
The Beau with Pleasure on his Tatler views
Th' approaching Moment of his Assignation,
Patient our Heroes sit, till loud Huzza's
At once bring the Reprieve for glad Mackheath,
And them dismiss, who steer their Courses home.
