O all ye Nymphs, in lawless Love's Disport
Assiduous!  whose ever open Arms
Both Day and Night stand ready to receive
The fierce Assaults of Britain's Am'rous Sons!
Whether in Golden Watch and stiff Brocade
You shine in Play-House or the Drawing-Room
Whores thrice Magnificent!  Delight of KINGS,
And Lords of goodliest Note; or in mean Stuffs
Ply ev'ry Evening near St. CLEMENT'S Pile,
Or Church of fame'd St. DUNSTAN, or in Lane,
Or Alley's dark Recess, or open Street,
Known by White-apron, bart'ring Love with Cit,
Or strolling Lawyer's Clerk at cheapest Rate;
Whether of ** Blyer's or of ** Heywood's Train,
Hear, and Attend:  In C&mdash;m's mighty Praise
I sing, for sure 'tis worthy of a song.
VENUS assist my Lays, Thou who presidest
In City-Ball or Courtly Masquerade,
Goddess supreme!  sole Auth'ress of our Loves,
Pure and impure!  whose Province 'tis to rule
Not only o'er the chaster Marriage-Bed,
But filthiest Stews, and Houses of kept Dames!
To Thee I call, and with a friendly Voice,
C&mdash;ms I sing:  by C&mdash;ms now secure
Boldly the willing Maid, by Fear awhile
Kept virtuous, owns thy Pow'r, and tastes thy Joys
Tumultuous; Joys untasted but for them.
Unknown big Belly, and the squawling Brat,
Best Guard of Modesty!  She Riots now
Thy Vot'ry, in the Fullness of thy Bliss.

Happy the Man, who in his Pocket keeps,
Whether with Green or Scarlet Ribbon bound,
A well made C&mdash;m. &mdash; He, nor dreads the Ills
Of Shankers or Cordee, or Buboes Dire!
Thrice happy He &mdash; for when in lewd Embrace
Of Transport-feigning Whore, Creature obscene!
The cold insipid Purchase of a Crown!
Bless'd Chance!  Sight seldom seen!  and mostly giv'n
By Templar, or Oxonian &mdash; Best Support
Of Drury, and her starv'd Inhabitants;
With C&mdash;m arm'd he wages Am'rous Fight
Fearless, secure; nor Thought of future Pains,
Resembling Prick of Pins and Needle's Point,
E'er checks his Raptures, or disturbs his Joys:
So AJAX, Grecian Chief, with Seven-fold Shield,
Enormous!  brave'd the Trojan's fiercest Rage:
While the hot daring Youth, whose giddy Lust
Or Taste too exquisite, in Danger's Spite,
Resolves upon FRUITION, unimpare'd
By intervening Armour, C&mdash;m hight!
Scarce three Days past, bewails the dear-bought Bliss,
For now tormented sore with scalding Heat
Of Urine, dread Fore-runner of a Clap!
With Eye repentant, he surveys his Shirt
Diversify'd with Spots of yellow Hue,
Sad Symptom of ten thousand Woes to come!
Now no Relief, but from the Surgeon's Hand,
Or Pill-prescribing Leach, tremendous Sight
To Youth diseas'd!  In Garret high he moans
His wretched Fate, where vex'd with nauseous Draughts
And more afflicting Bolus, he in Pangs
Unfelt before, curses the dire Result
Of lawless Revelling; from Morn to Eve
By never-ceasing keen Emetics urge'd;
Nor slights he now his Grannum's Sage Advice:
Nor feels he only but in Megrim'd Head,
Head fraught with Horror &mdash; Child of Sallow Spleen,
Millions of idle Whims and Fancies dance
Alternate, and perplex his labouring Mind.
What erst he has been told of sad Mischance
Either in Pox or Clap, of falling Nose,
Scrape'd Shins, and Buboes' Pains, of vile Effect!
All feels the Youth, or fancies that he feels.
Nay, be it but a Gleet, or gentlest Clap,
His ill-foreboding Fears deny him Rest,
And fancied Poxes vex his tortur'd Bones;
Too late convinc'd of C&mdash;m's Sov'reign Use.

Hail, Manes of Love-propegating Pimp!
Long since deceas'd, and long by me adore'd;
From whose prolific Brain, by lucky Hit,
Or Inspiration from all-gracious Heaven,
First sprang the mighty Secret; Secret to guard
From Poison virulent of unsound Dame.
Hail, happy Albion, in whose fruitful Land
The wondrous MAN arose, from whose strange Skill
In inmost Nature, Thou hast reap'd more Fame,
More solid Glory, than from NEWTON'S Toil;
NEWTON who next is England's noblest Boast:
If aught I can presage, as Smyrna once,
Chios and Colophon, and Rhodian-Isle,
Famous for vast Coloss; and Argos fair,
And Salamis, well known for Grecian Fight
With Mighty XERXES; and for the Praise
Of HOMER'S Birth-Place, blind, egregious Bard!
In after Times, so shall with warm Dispute
Europa's rival Cities proudly strive,
Ambitious each of being deem'd the Seat
Where CONDONAMUS first drew vital Air.

Too cruel Fate &mdash; Partial to human Race&mdash;
To us Propitious &mdash; But O hard Decree!
Why, why so long in Darksome Womb of Night
Dwelt the profound Arcanum, late reveal'd;
Say I not rather why, ye Niggard Stars,
Are not your Blessings given unpall'd with Ill,
And Love, your greatest Blessing, free from Curse,
Curse of Disease!  How many gallant Youths
Have fallen by the iron Hand of Death,
Untimely, immature; As if to love,
Your everlasting Purpose, were a Crime.
But O ye Youths born under happier Stars,
Britannia's chiefest Hopes!  upon whose Cheeks
Gay Health sits smiling, and whose nervous Limbs
Sweet Ease, her Offspring fair!  invigorates,
Unbrac'd as yet by foul Contagion,
Fav'rites of Fortune!  let th' unhappy Lot
Of others, teach you timely to beware;
That when replete with Love, and spurn'd by Lust,
You seek the Fair-One in her Cobweb Haunts,
Or when allure'd by Touch of passing Wench,
Or caught by Smile insidious of the Nymph
Who in Green-Box, at Play-House, nightly flaunts,
And fondly calls thee to Love's luscious Feast,
You cautious stay awhile, till fitly Arm'd
With C&mdash;m Shield, at RUMMER'S best supply'd,
Or never-failing ROSE, so may you thrum
Th' exstatic Harlot, and each joyous Night
Crown with fresh Raptures; till at last unhurt
And sated with the Banquet, you retire.

By me forewarn'd thus may you ever tread
Love's pleasing Paths in blest Security.
