O Thou!  (what e'er thou art, where e'er inshrin'd,)
That once wast Weekly, turn thy kind regard
A while on me. &mdash; Behold me sit disconsolate!
With down-cast eyes, by vile mundungus curst!
Yet thus depress'd, mark (warm'd with grateful love)
My sinking genius struggling with her fate,
Clasp the last remnant of departing song,
And aim to sigh in mournful sounds thy praise,
To sing thy requiem in her latest verse.

Oh!  friend to life; to virtue; soul of both!
To death, thy victor, most effective foe!
Oh!  kind dispenser of the sovereign plant,
With all its native virtues, genuine sweets,
Ne'er did thy hand with touch unhallow'd dare
Debase for gain what god-like Rawleigh gave&mdash;
How have I bless'd thee, when surrounding joys
Brought on the balmy gale (the Zephyrs left
And all the plaintive plain) have clapt their wings,
And hover'd round my soul!  when all the Nine
With each delightful whiff have pour'd their fires
In streams of transport, on my swelling breast!
When Bacchus smil'd, as conscious that his glass,
Thus introduc'd, would more than doubly please;
When Venus laugh'd with all her Loves around;
For Venus and the Loves so soft and fair,
(Whatever vain coquets and fops may do)
Still court the fragrance of the spicy breeze.
Yet still the soul (her guardian, Pallas, near)
Shun'd the false joy of the superfluous glass,
Nor Beauty charm'd but with the Virtues led.

But now alas!  how chang'd the blissful scene,
What sullen murmurs rise at partial fate!
While with dejected mien I breathe a gale
Rank, noxious, burning hot!  that prompts, alas!
The sip eternal, void of genuine joy!
That leads, with dwarfish steps insensible,
That foe to peace, gigantick drunk'ness on.
Reflecting deep on all the varying woes,
In varying shapes that load the wings of time,
On fortune's sport with sublunary joys,
(Those fleeting visions of deluded man,
For ever boding future wants and woes,
Their time a moment, their existence air,
When miss'd vexation, yet when grasp'd a cloud!)
But chief, oh!  Weekly, on my loss in thee,
Now fly the Nine, as once from him that sung,
Or strove to sing, on true Tobacco's sons
Saracastick lay, while folly tun'd the verse.
Oh!  ere they leave me, Weekly, let me bless,
Oh let me bless, the hand that bless'd so long,
Thy hand now cold:  but ah!  they haste away.
Rest to thy dust &mdash; and transport to thy soul!
Blest be thy mem'ry &mdash; and eternal too!
More struggles in my breast &mdash; but &mdash; puff &mdash; alas,
This drowsy weed &mdash; binds up my falt'ring tongue,
Damps all &mdash; puff &mdash; my thoughts &mdash; and &mdash; puff&mdash;
I sink to slumbers, and can &mdash; sing &mdash; no more.
