Happy the man whose weighty purse contains
Or yellow gold, pale silver, or the coin
Of ruddy copper; he on chearful thoughts
Enjoys a mental feast, nor pines with care.
The chink of gold with gold (transporting sound!)
Excels the timbrel, or the Syren's voice
Harmonious, or the whisper soft
Of Zephyr, warbled thro' the breathing flute
To sleeping Beauty, by assiduous Love,
In midnight serenade.  Gold, magic spell!
Secures from wants and woes, from bitter still
Extracts the sweets of life, and leaves the dregs
To Poverty and Me.  Say, favour'd youths!
When from the bag's wide mouth, or secret slit
Of fob, you conscious draw the glitt'ring gold,
What pride, what pleasure kindles in your breast!
Grief flies, nor Mem'ry, if she views, regrets
Home, happy seat of freedom and delight!
Where letter'd tyranny no more decries
The task laborious, but the vacant mind
Is free to ev'ry bliss, and lur'd by all,
Insatiate riots on parental love.

But I nor join the gingling sport of chuck,
Nor chiming ring my coin, but debtor too,
Far from the tread of social foot, the shout
Of mingled joy, with slow and silent pace,
Alone thro' unfrequented glades I rove;
Lost in the mazes of distracting thought,
My mind too wanders, by no converse cheer'd.

Thus, when the birds in sportive circles glide,
Or perch'd on some tall willow's bending top,
In joyful concert pour the blended strain;
The solitary bat, in chimneys dark,
Or hollow tree, absconds, nor dares enjoy
The noon-tide breeze of balmy spring; when eve
Steals o'er the fading landscape, thro' the gloom
She wings her solitary flight, while ghosts
Glide silent o'er the haunted green, or start
At the 'lone owl's shrill scream, ill-omen'd sound!

But lo!  to sharpen pain with sights of bliss,
And scourge with Envy's scorpions, where, by years
Bent double, on her weary arm an hag
The leaden basket bears; tott'ring with haste,
And grinning she approaches:  see!  with joy
A welcome crowd surrounds her; money now
Bears off or nonpareil, or sweet permain,
Or rennet, golden fruit!  I, like the fam'd
Tho' wretched Tantalus, whom thund'ring Jove
Plung'd into hell's sulphureous deep abyss,
In midst of plenty, poor and meagre stand.
Yet Tantalus one wretched comfort boasts,
Society in woe; near him renew'd
Prometheus' liver, doom'd the living food
Of the still hung'ring vulture.  Sisyphus
Straining each nerve in unavailing toil,
Up the steep hill scarce moves the pond'rous stone.
Ixion, bound in galling chains, is whirl'd
Round with the restless wheel.  I, wretched I,
In Poverty, that complicated curse, sustain
The plague of each, no fellow suff'rer nigh.

At night I quaff no sweet nectareous juice,
Nor laugh at merry pun nor jocund tale,
But, like the damn'd, when Orpheus charm'd the shades,
With face distorted screw a painful smile,
While others o'er the golden posset chat,
Whose yellow streams like fam'd Pactolus flow
Redundant, with a jug of small-beer flip,
Want's chearless potion, I deserted sit
Like meagre hermit in a gloomy grot,
With trees embower'd, and far from human sight.
To such retreat, from all things vile and vain,
The glare of wealth, and blandishment of joy,
O lead me, god of Silence!  hide me here
From Insolence and Scorn; where Poverty
Presides, the poor have peace.  Receive me, then,
Pale Goddess!  from the shine of gold I fly.
So, when the gaudy sun in glitt'ring car
Arises, lo!  afar the gloomy shades
Depart, and vanish from the rosy morn,
With chaos mixing and maternal night.
