Whilst You enjoy, near chrystal Isis Stream,
The chearing Converse of delightful Friends,
I sigh penurious, solitary, sad,
Pensive, of human Solace quite debarr'd.
On Thee ten thousand Thousand Joys attend,
And bless thy flowing Hours, and crown thy Days
With Mirth, and Happiness, and endless Peace.

Now upon You some rural Virgin smiles,
Your Fair One's kind, the happy beauteous Nymph
Charms her enamour'd, fav'rite, happy Swain,
With Aspect chaste, endearing, Glances kind,
Inviting, melting Looks, and equal Love.
Oh!  how unlike the Dames of O&mdash;d Mould,
Skilful with practis'd Airs, and studied Smiles,
To snare the Hearts of inadvertent Youth,
To dress, and trole the Tongue, and roll the Eye.
With Arts sophisticate no Colours stain
Her Beauties; lo!  her Cheeks with purple Glow
Blush Modesty and Love; her Life adorn'd
With strictest Virtue, Piety unfeign'd,
And purest Chastity, no Blemish knows,
Guiltless of Ill, while sweetest Innocence,
And Sanctity of Manners round her shine.

Now You, perhaps, peruse some fav'rite Book,
Now taste the Pleasures of a cheerful Glass,
Now laugh at Quibble, or Conundrum quaint,
Now chat away the live-long Summer Days,
Now prattle Stories by a Winter Fire.

But I, unhappy I, whom cloyster'd Walls
Incage, far distant from my native Soil,
The Sport of wanton Fortune, live depriv'd
Of ev'ry common Privilege of Life.
Nor Converse me of entertaining Friend,
Nor merry Tale, nor care-beguiling Jest,
Nor social Catch, nor quav'ring Laugh delight.
My gloomy, melancholy, mournful Days
Pass joyless, doom'd for ever to the Din
Of wrangling, barbarous, unmeaning Terms,
The Pedant's learned Jargon, and the Plague
Of dull, illogical, untutor'd Youth.

Nor Face of ancient, nor of modern King
Emboss'd, or upon Gold, or Silver Ore,
Eliza in gay Ruff bedeck'd, or Charles
On prancing Steed high-mounted, or Great Anne
Divinely fair, who yet, tho' fair, receives
New Beauties from the splendid Shilling's rays,
With shining Lustre glitter in my Purse,
Or clinking jingle with melodious Chime.

Raging, devouring, fateless Hunger gnaws
My Vitals, parching ever-parching Thirst
Burns in my droughty Throat, nor glewy Juice
Of fatt'ning Ale, nor gen'rous Wine, nor Taste
Of Hertfordian Nectar, Moyle, or Musk,
Or Redstreak, my unhappy Want supplies.

Thus, to shun prying Ken of hideous Dun,
Thirst in my Throat, and Famine in my Bowels,
I to recess of naked Room repair;
A Garret vile, dark, dark and dismal all
As Night, as threefold Night in sable Clouds
Inshrouded; o'er the nodding tott'ring Roof
Spiders wide-spread their disembowell'd Webs
Pendulous:  Enter thro' the shatter'd Walls
With chilling Blasts the hoarsly whistling Winds
In hollow Murmurs; in the dusky Gloom
I sigh disconsolate; no warmth of Wood
My frozen Limbs with crackling Blaze revives.
The doubtful Flame of a dim-winking Lamp,
Glimpsing short intervals of glimm'ring Light
Makes Horror look more horrible; with Arms
Across, I now in doleful pensive Mood
Traverse my darksome, dismal, dreary Cell.
Now moping meditate on frightful Theme,
Hobgoblins, Ghosts, and Spectres (ghastly Forms!)
Who at dead Midnight's solitary Hour
With goggling Eyes in sawcer Sockets rolling,
Tremendous stalk in grisly Shapes the Earth,
Till op'ning Curtains of the blushing East,
And Cock shrill-crowing warn them home to Hell.
Hark!  now the wakeful Dogs with howlings bay
The gliding Sprights; the screaming Schreech-Owl now
Prolongs his baleful Note; now all mind
The solemn Silence of the gloomy Night
I count the hollow-sounding Clocks; now hear
In melancholy Hum the Midnight-Bell
With drowsy Knell toll sorrowfully forth
A sadly slow, a mournful-murm'ring Peal.

No Smiles of bloomy Virgin to my Heart
Breath Joy, and Tenderness, and soft Repose.
Nought I behold, or hear, of Female Kind,
But parchment Skin, and haggard ghastly Face
Of BEDMAKER; her shrivel'd skinny Brow
With choppy furrow'd Wrinkles is intrench'd;
Her Bones are marrowless, her Visage wan;
A total Palsey shakes her trembling Frame,
Here Eyes down deep in hollow Orbits sink,
A Bunch of Keys hangs tinkling by her Side;
A faithful Staff her hobbling Steps supports,
And stooping downward to its kindred Earth
Her weakly Body bends: &mdash; not uglier Hag,
Nor of a swarthier hue, upborn aloft
On magick Broom-staff nightly Journies rides,
Whiffled in whirlwind thro' the troubled Sky,
Lur'd forth by forceful Spells to rendevouz
Of Lucifer, and many an Imp, to dance
With Lapland Witches at dead Hour of Night
By shad'wy Moonshine; at their impious charms
Unseated Churches topple headlong down,
Church-yards from gaping Graves yawn up their Dead,
Rifted Oaks fall uptorn, tempestuous Storms
Arise, and the whole fiery Welkin glows.

So pass my troublous Nights, and so my Days;
And so the next Day, and the next, must pass,
To morrow, and To morrow, ever fix'd
Invariably to constant Ill; or curst
To starvling Commons, and thin acid Taff,
To musty Folio's half-mouse-eaten Page,
To drudge at Logick in the jarring Hall,
Or bend submiss to Fellow's gracious Nod.

Thus, lash'd unwilling to the hated Wheel,
Some lab'ring Turnspit sweats with workful Toil
Ceaseless; He paws, He shifts his Peace, He treads
With frequent Foot the oft-repeated Track;
Straining He strives t' ascend the steepy Top,
What was the steepy Top adown descends;
But lo!  another, and another yet,
And yet a Thousand, and a Thousand more,
Remain to be renew'd; now up, now down
In many an Orbit rolling runs around
The whirling Wheel; the weary Cur confin'd
No end of his repeated Labour knows,
Tho' still beginning, still to be begun.
