Vain were the thought to ask th' Aonian maids,
With sacred rapture to exalt my song;
Since ne'er on Pindus' flow'ry turf I trod,
Nor tasted Helicon's transporting spring,
In sober strain, salubrious truth I write,
Unbless'd, unaided by the muse I love.

Lo!  to the place where Comus, jolly God,
His revels kept, my steps blind Fortune led:
Joyous was all the croud, sounded the roof
With instrumental harmony, and song;
Flow'd the full goblet, smoak'd the Indian weed,
And wanton joy sat smiling in each face:
When, by the pow'r of Bacchus overcome,
Sleep with kind hand reliev'd my lab'ring brain,
Sleeping my comrades left me: &mdash; Gracious heav'n!
What pen can write, or how shall tongue declare,
Or thought imagine the disgusting scene
That met my waking eye!  Crack'd bowls, and pipes,
Obscene (the trophies of the reeling god!)
Myself all sick and languishing, my pulse
Beat various &mdash; slowly now, as death
Throughout had chill'd me with his icy hand;
&mdash;Now with a fev'rish force impetuous mov'd.
When strait the room with light unwelcome shone.
"O light!  how I detest thy piercing beam,
Dispelling friendly shades!  foul deeds like these
Should lurk in darkness, from all conceal'd."

Behold a miracle (attend with awe,
Couch'd in rough phrase believe the museless song)
Before me stood a venerable man,
Old, but not bending with the weight of years;
His face was ruddy, and he smil'd benign,
As if nor sickness had his form impair'd,
Nor anxious cares his soul:  his silver'd head
Was bound with wreaths of salutary flow'rs,
Call'd HOPE by man, but Panace by gods.
"My son, he said (and at his voice divine
New life beat vig'rous in each throbbing vein)
Long has my friendly influence mov'd the scorn,
My name the laughter of the sons of men,
The sons of men, regardless of their weal
And health, the greatest sublunary good!
The genius I of liquor call'd below
SMALL-BEER, and doubtless you have heard me damn'd
Full oft, by Belials rude, outrageous sons:
But yet, were honour due, to Temp'rance giv'n,
Mine were the favours of th' applauding croud,
But wine, luxuriant wine, usurps my throne,
And like a tyrant, first enslaves, then kills.
In order, all the virtues should I name
That call me sire, too soon the rising sun
Would break the thread of my unfinish'd tale,
(For unembody'd sprights walk not by day)
Joy I impart to all, &mdash; not that false glee,
Shortliv'd, which measures but from glass to glass,
But constant health, and pleasure unalloy'd:
&mdash;Here, taste and live, live soberly and well."
This said, a vase with steady hand he gave,
Full to the brim, I quaff'd the tender'd draught;
Swift the cool stream refresh'd my burning throat,
And thus with low obeysance, I return'd:
"Father!  I thank thee for thy visit kind,
And for thy welcome gift" &mdash; I would have said&mdash;
But the lark whistled at th' approach of morn,
Which ting'd the glowing east with rosy hue,
In haste my visionary guest retir'd,
And left me deep in contemplation drown'd,
Resolving reason never more to quench
In floods Lethean of deceitful wine;
Deceitful wine!  embrew'd with mixtures dire,
By the curs'd vintner's art for sordid pelf.
O!  grant me, heav'n, to live with health, and ease,
My books, a sober friend, Small-beer, and sense:
So shall my years the smiling fates prolong,
And each auspicious morn shall see me happy.
