Ye Nymphs, who sportive on the secret Top
Of Helicon, or where Parnassus lifts
His Cloud-envelop'd Head, the sleeping Strings
Wake into Voice, and sweep the sounding Lyre:
Castalia's sober Streams awhile forsake,
And on the Formian or Falernian Hill
Your Empire fix!  And see, the purple vine
Inviting waves; the bending Branches blush
Ambrosial, paint th' exhilarating Fruit
Turgid with Wine, and all the Mountain smiles!
Here 'midst the well-rang'd Files your voices raise
Harmonious, and to the gen'rous God,
Lenean Bacchus, give the grateful Song.
But first around your Brows the branching Vine
Blend with the sacred Laurel's friendly Shade,
Sweetly interchang'd; and from the sparkling Glass
Sip rich Regalement.  From th' unmoisten'd Lip
And parched Throat no Melody can flow;
But, like some Gate on unoil'd Hinge flung ope,
Grating harsh Discord, the Ear-wounding Notes
Incondite issue, and like Screams of Ghosts,
Die in the Throat abortive; while the Bards,
Warm'd with the sweet Carouse and bellying Bowl,
Quaff Immorality and Joy, nor dread
Like poor Anacreon, the choaking Stone.

And see!  encircled by the striking Fawns
Mix'd with the Nymphs wide o'er the ample Cask,
Of larger Size than that which erst enclos'd
The Cynic Sage, the mighty Godhead strides
Like some Colossus:  O'er his rosy Face
The pendant Can, like that which whilom hung
On the wide Beach, beneath whose grateful Shade
Silenus slept:  The sportive Train around,
Weaving the Mazes of the various Dance,
Provoke the sprightly Music, and amidst
These harmless Jolities, and gay Disports,
The flowing Goblet ever and anon
Invigorates their Souls, and crowns the Mirth.

But see, he comes, the God!  the God!  he comes,
Fills all my Breast, dilates my fervent Heart,
And rushes on me in a Flood of Wine.
All hail Lenean Father!  Bacchus hail!
Thee in Campania, or the blushing Groves
Of Vine-invested Nysos, with thy Song
Charming th' attentive Nymphs, and wond'ring Satyrs,
Hang on thy tuneful Numbers:  Thee among
The frantic Matrons, with the Thyrsus arm'd,
Holding nocturnal Orgies, whilst each Spring
Nectareous flows, and from the opening Oaks
Burst Streams mellifluous:  Thee with Mercy mild,
And gentle Love, the bright, afflicted Dame
Embracing, to the Beauty of the Night
Adding new Glory:  Thee with just Revenge
The sober Miscreant, who in evil Hour
Lop'd all thy Vines imprudent, and thy Name
Disown'd, chastising:  Thee, when wild Uproar
And Force opponent thro' its hundred Courts
Appall'd the Sky, among the mountainous Sons
Of Earth, foul Rout with many a furrow'd Gash
Terribly dealing:  Thee the Poet's Breast
To tuneful Numbers and immortal Verse
Exciting, will I sing; and to thy Name
A lasting Mon'ment raise, whose ample Base
Like some strong Mountain stands; whose tow'ring Top
Rises superior to the Memphian Pyres.

Whilst Ariconian Vales with pulpous Fruit
Pomaceous blush, and with irradiate Gold
Vermillion'd shine, replenishing the Casks
With annual Cyder, grateful to the Bard:
Whilst Dorset Fields with Barley Grain stand thick,
And Farnham boasts the meet Array of Hops,
A sightly Prospect!  on the uxorious Poles
Ascending spiral, to the Barley Drink
Infusing grateful Flavour and rich Taste:
While strong Oporto, and renown'd Champaigne,
Shall please all Tastes, and warm the Poet's Breast,
Thy Name, thy Honour, and my Verse shall live!

The Muse, like some fair Rose when gentle Show'rs
Unlock its Sweets, and call forth all its Odours,
Glows brighter, and her fading Charms revives
Sweet-breathing, as the vinous Juice inspires
New Vigour; from her rosy Lips burst forth
Sounds more than mortal:  See, she spurns the Earth
Exulting, and outsoars the Eagle's Flight!
Hail, God of Wine!  Great Son of Jove, all hail!
With thee o'er ev'ry Hill, thro' ev'ry Grove
Raptur'd I'll wander; thee on ev'ry Bank,
Its Stream untasted, will I sing; the Verse
Shall rise luxuriant, like thy shooting Vines,
And like thy never-failing Cask endure,
Till Worlds shall fade, and Wine shall be no more.

Thus on the Banks of Vaga's fruitful Stream,
The Ariconian Bard, melodious Notes
Improving, carol'd; whilst one Hand sustain'd
The Tube of blackest Hue, exhaling Puffs
Of acrimonious Fume, Companion meet
Of Wine and Friendship:  in the other high,
He held the palatable, wholesome Can,
With the rich Nectar of Silurian Fruit
O'erflowing, and his sweet loquacious Strings
Travers'd alternate; to the tuneful Notes
Pomona danc'd, by Scudamorean Trees
Attentive follow'd, o'er the sacred Bard
Spreading a moving Shade:  th' irradiate Fruit,
Like gentle Maro's vegetable Gold,
Burnish'd the Shade:  Hartcourt approv'd the Lay,
And gave the Splendid Shilling in his Purse
To shine delectable; and Harley rais'd
High on th' Olympian Hill th' immortal Bard.
