I.
'Twas at his House, in old Gabaa built,
Sad Saul lay conscious of his Guilt,
With Grace no longer bless'd,
Distracted, griev'd, oppress'd,
His Brain disorder'd, and his Soul possess'd.
See!  See!  He cries,
See the Fiends where they rise!
Oh!  Help, they o'erpow'r me!
They snatch, they devour me!
Then wild from his Couch all trembling he bounded,
In Terror, in Rage, and with Phantoms confounded.
His Friends around in Anguish wait,
They weep, they wail, they mourn his Fate;
In vain they mourn, they strive in vain
To calm his Soul, and sooth his Pain.
They heard of David's tuneful Fame,
For him they sent, and David came.
He cou'd to Wonder touch the Lyre,
Or gay or serious Thoughts inspire;
Cou'd soften Pain, and Grief asswage,
Now lull the Soul to soft Desire,
Now rouze it into Rage.

II.
The Psalmist plac'd before the King,
Examin'd whence the Madness came:
He soon betray'd the hateful Spring,
And sought a proper Theme.
Upon the Harp his Head reclin'd,
To that his Ear intent was giv'n,
Coelestial Thoughts inflame his Mind,
And now and then he stole an Eye to Heav'n.
First in gentle Strains surprising,
Softly, sadly, sweetly rising,
Man, oh Man!  Why still pursuing,
Still, he sung, thy own Undoing!
Always Falling, then Repenting,
Wav'ring still, and still Resolving,
Now Rejoycing, then Relenting,
Now in Joys forbid Dissolving.
Cans't thou find, Oh!  find no Measure,
Know no Mean of Pain, of Pleasure!
The Notes prevail, kind soften'd Thoughts impart,
Steal on the Ear and sink into the Heart.

III.
Now David sings in Numbers loud,
How Heav'n confounds th' Unjust and Proud,
Chastises those who doubt his Sway,
And those who don't, and Disobey.
He then began the Fate of those,
Who in the Desart against Moses rose.
Behold while they their Censers light,
And Incense burn in his Despight,
Corah, their Chiefs, their Goods and Temples round,
At once down swallow'd in the gaping Ground!
From Heav'n then pour'd a Tempest of Fire,
And in the Flame the Vulgar expire.
The King with Terror hears,
Reflects, reviews his Life;
He Trembles, Weeps, appears
All over Thought and Grief.

IV.
The Prophet soon perceiv'd the Prince
Too sadly touch'd for his Offence;
His sorrowing Soul, o'ercome with Fear,
And Grief, declining to Despair.
Then sung in sprightly Lays,
His sinking Heart to raise:
Man is the Darling of the Sky,
God views us with a Parent's Eye;
For Heav'n he designs us,
From Error reclines us;
And while his Commands we obey,
We gain ourselves Treasures
Of Joys and of Pleasures,
Of Pleasures that never decay.
And tho' greatly and often we stray,
If Pardon repentant we pray,
With Joy he gives Ear,
With Grace crowns our Pray'r,
Why shou'd, why shou'd we, why shou'd we,
Why shou'd we then ever despair?
All over the Skies
Hosannas arise,
And Heav'n is declar'd forgiving and wise.
Reviv'd at the Sound,
The Prince star'd around,
He breath'd, and he hop'd, and Comfort he found.

V.
But, lo!  the wicked Fiend within
Would fain pervert his Hope to Sin,
And to Presumption swell his Soul again.
Who'd lead a painful Life,
When Sighs, a Moment's Grief,
Regain departed Grace,
And blackest Crimes efface?
This the divine Exorcist hears,
The pleasing Med'cine soon prepares;
Kindly checks in feeling Measures,
All his Love, his Bent to Pleasures.
O Gideon!  Gideon!  once so great,
So dreadful in the listed Plain,
Now where is all the regal State,
How short-liv'd all thy pompous Reign!
The Great, the Just, the Glorious, Grave,
Like Madian fills the silent Grave:
Thousands no more confess his Sway,
In Dust he lies, a Reptile's Prey.
A doleful Murmur fills the vaulted Room,
While, each reflecting on his future Doom,
Saul checks his Pride, and ceases to presume.
Prostrate he falls, reveres the Skies,
With Pray'r propitiates Heav'n,
With lifted Hands, and flowing Eyes,
Implores to be forgiv'n.

VI.
But hark!  how nobler Strains surprise!
Spreading and loud the solemn Notes arise,
And in exalted Sounds slow, length'ning, mount the Skies.
Oh!  Lord of Hosts!  how bless'd are they
Who act obsequious to thy Sway!
Thy Arm the Wicked lays in Dust,
Thy Arm exalts and shields the Just:
Thy Nod can shake the mighty Ball;
Before thy Thunder Armies fall;
From Thee all Good, all Life descend,
And thou art All in All,
Sole Lord of Heav'n, and Earth and Hell,
Unfelt, Unheard, Invisible;
Too vast for mortal Tongue to tell,
Or Thought to comprehend.
With Love and Fear of Heav'n inspir'd,
Saul stood in Raptures, and admir'd
The Psalmist's bless'd harmonious Art,
No more to Rage or Grief inclin'd,
Prospects divine engage his Mind,
And Gladness fills his Heart.

VII.
Thus David's Harp cou'd mend the Soul,
The black Attempts of Hell controul;
And Musick thus, in former Days,
Resounded sweet Almighty's Praise,
Cou'd calm the Mind to Peace, and Heav'nly Raptures raise.
In After-Times its Force decays,
To soften'd Sounds confin'd,
Poorly content the Ear to please,
But not exalt the Mind.
Divine Cecilia came at length,
Improv'd its Sweetness, and reviv'd its Strength,
Her Author's Praise harmoniously renew'd,
And David's bold coelestial Strains pursu'd.
When the loud nervous Organ sounds,
We hear, we hear we know not what,
Something solemn, something great,
Wrapt in the Skies, ourselves no more,
Scorn earthly Things we sought before,
And fir'd with more than mortal Heat,
Contemn all narrow Bounds.
Swell all ye Organs!  inspire ev'ry Flute!
Leave, Heav'nly Minstrels!  no Instrument mute!
Revive ev'ry Lyre, awake ev'ry String,
And loudly resound the Virgin and King!
He cou'd a Prince's Rage appease,
A wicked Fiend disarm;
She cou'd to Heav'n an Atheist raise,
And did an Angel charm.
