Now did the Bag-Pipe in hoarse Notes begin
Th' expected Signal to the neighb'ring Green;
While the mild Sun, in the Decline of Day,
Shoots from the distant West a cooler Ray.
Allarm'd, the sweating Crowds forsake the Town,
Unpeopled Finglas is a Desart grown.
Joan quits her Cows, that with full Udders stand,
And low unheeded for the Milker's Hand.
The joyous Sound the distant Reapers hear,
Their Harvest leave, and to the Sport repair.
The Dublin-Prentice, at the welcome Call,
In Hurry rises from his Cakes and Ale;
Handing the flaunting Semptress o'er the Plains,
He struts a Beau among the homely Swains.

The Butcher's soggy Spouse amid the Throng,
Rubb'd clean, and tawdry drest, puffs slow along:
Her pond'rous Rings the wond'ring Mob behold,
And dwell on ev'ry Finger heap'd with Gold:
Long to St. Patrick's filthy Shambles bound,
Surpris'd, she views the rural Scene around;
The distant Ocean there salutes her Eyes,
Here tow'ring Hills in goodly Order rise;
There fruitful Valleys long extended lay,
Here Sheaves of Corn, and Cocks of fragrant Hay.
While whatso'er she hears, she smells, or sees,
Gives her fresh Transports; and she doats on Trees.
Yet, (hapless Wretch) the servile Thirst of Gain,
Can force her to her stinking Stall again.

Nor was the Country-Justice wanting there,
To make a Penny of the Rogues that swear;
With supercilious Looks he awes the Green,
"Sirs, keep the Peace &mdash; I represent the Queen."
Poor Paddy swears his whole Week's Gains away,
While my young Squires blaspheme, and nothing pay.
All on the mossie Turf confus'd were laid,
The jolly Rustick, and the buxom Maid,
Impatient for the Sport, too long delay'd.

When lo, old Arbiter amid the Croud,
Prince of the annual Games, proclaim'd aloud,
"Ye Virgins, that intend to try the Race,
The swiftest wins a Smock enrich'd with Lace:
A Cambrick Kerchiff shall the next adorn;
And Kidden Gloves shall by the third be worn."
This said, he high in Air display'd each Prize;
All view the waving Smock with longing Eyes.

Fair Oonah at the Barrier first appears,
Pride of the neighb'ring Mill, in Bloom of Years;
Her native Brightness borrows not one Grace,
Uncultivated Charms adorn her Face,
Her rosie Cheeks with modest Blushes glow,
At once her Innocence and Beauty show:
Oonah the Eyes of each Spectator draws,
What Bosom beats not in fair Oonah's Cause?

Tall as a Pine, Majestick Nora stood,
Her youthful Veins were fill'd with sprightly Blood,
Inur'd to Toyls, in wholsom Gardens bred,
Exact in ev'ry Limb, and form'd for Speed.

To thee, O Shevan, next what Praise is due?
Thy Youth and Beauty doubly strike the View,
Fresh as the Plumb that keeps the Virgin Blue!
Each well deserves the Smock, &mdash; but Fates decree
But One must wear it, tho' deserv'd by Three.

Now Side by Side the panting Rivals stand,
And fix their Eyes upon th' appointed Hand:
The Signal giv'n, spring forward to the Race;
Not fam'd Camilla ran with fleeter Pace.
Nora, as Light'ning swift, the rest o'er pass'd,
While Shevan fleetly ran, yet ran the last.
But Oonah, thou hadst Venus on thy side;
At Norah's Petticoat the Goddess ply'd,
And in a Trice the fatal String unty'd.
Quick stop'd the Maid, nor wou'd, to win the Prize,
Expose her hidden Charms to vulgar Eyes.
But while to tye the treach'rous Knot she stay'd,
Both her glad Rivals pass the weeping Maid.
Now in despair she plies the Race again,
Not winged Winds dart swifter o'er the Plain:
She (while chaste Diana aids her hapless Speed)
Shevan outstrip'd &mdash; nor further cou'd succeed.
For with redoubled Haste bright Oonah flies,
Seizes the Goal, and wins the noblest Prize.

Loud Shouts and Acclamations fill the Place,
Tho' Chance on Oonah had bestow'd the Race;
Like Felim none rejoyc'd &mdash; a lovelier Swain
Ne'er fed a Flock on the Fingalian Plain.
Long he with secret Passion lov'd the Maid,
Now his encreasing Flame it self betray'd.
Stript for the Race how bright did she appear!
No Cov'ring hid her Feet, her Bosom bare,
And to the Wind she gave her flowing Hair.
A thousand Charms he saw, conceal'd before,
Those, yet conceal'd, he fancy'd still were more.

Felim, as Night came on, young Oonah woo'd;
Soon willing Beauty was by Truth subdu'd.
No jarring Settlement their Bliss annoys,
No Licence needed to defer their Joys.
Oonah e'er Morn the Sweets of Wedlock try'd;
The Smock she won a Virgin, wore a Bride.
