Happy the Man, who void of Care and Strife,
In Chamber well adorn'd, or Garret vile,
Enjoys the Rays of a consoling Fire:
He nor with Envy views his neigh'bring Room,
When gliss'ning it proclaims, that sprightly Mirth
And circling Glasses crown the jovial Night;
But with a Friend, luxuriant enjoys
The Warmth, and battens in the sunny Gleam;
Safe from the chilling Blasts of northern Winds,
The frozen Product of Hibernia's Hills,
That whistle dreadful, whilst in sung Abode,
Th' enjoy the Storm, and smile to hear it roar.
Here with a sober Game at Whisk, they spend
The dreary Night, or with a Story quaint,
With Art devis'd to make the Heart jocund,
Drive on the lagging Minutes with their Mirth.

Whilst I, depriv'd of all the Joys of Life,
Warmth and a Friend, disconsolate and cold,
In Coverlet involv'd, in vain content
To cherish native Heat in livid Limbs,
Benumb'd by bitter Hyperborean Blasts;
Blasts, which with bold Intrusion dare invade
Th' aerial Limits of my high Abode;
Here, as in fam'd Aeolian Caves of old,
They rustle dreadful, and with sweepy Sway,
Bear off the Tegument; whilst tortur'd thus,
With Imprecations dire,
Loud as their Mouths, and blust'ring as their Blasts,
With Shirt, or Doublet, I repair the Breach.
No Nut-brown Beer, created to regale
The Heart of dolorous Mortal, drench'd in woe,
With Toast innatant, chears my droopy Soul;
Nor Ale Musgrovian, where Arabian Sweets
Breathe from the Mug, and with their Warmth inspire
Joy to the Soul, and Vigour to the Limbs:
But o'er an heath'nish Pot of languid Tiff,
All Day I sit, and damp that vivid Spark,
Which like Aetnean Mountain still burns clear,
Tho' still surrounded with eternal Snow,
And Frosts perpetual bind its hoary Brows.
No glim'ring Light directs my uncertain Steps,
When Night and Nature claim their tribute due;
Unless enlighten'd, and at once reviv'd,
By the short fleeting Blaze of Paper, marr'd
Since the dire Itch of Writing fir'd my Mind.

With spunging Face, full oft to neigh'bring Room,
Cringing I slunge; insinuating Tale
Prolongs my Stay; or Joke, with Care excerpt
From Britain's-Mother-Wit, Collection rare!
Or Bull-Hibernian, incitation meet
To Mirth; or else of dreadful Goblins tell,
With Eyes of Flame; or Fairies deckt in Green,
That gambol'd on the Heath, by Country Maid,
In Ev'ning late, espied; or Elf jocund,
In Gossip-Cup immur'd, full wanton Freak!
Bob'd now a Toast on Mother Midnight's Nose;
Or else, a Stool fantastick, oft deceiv'd
Th' unwary Eye of Mortal drench'd in Wine,
Whilst with a Fall precipitate he rush'd,
And gave a new rise to Jollity and Mirth.

Thus with my Chat I lengthen out the Time,
'Till Heat and Liquor, like creating Powers,
New string my Nerves, and bid my Fancy shine;
And then elated, joyously I Sing,
And in great PHILIP'S pleasing Stile, relate
Of Bellarmine exhausted, and of Throats
Widely extended, whilst with hideous Gulp,
Whole Tides of Ale run down the parchy Chasm,
And mantle as they roll with grateful Hiss.
Or else in Strain harmonious, I tell
Of Sopho's Nose, with innate Rubies rich;
Or jovial Fellow, by extended Paunch,
And lucid ruddy Face distinguish'd well:
Or sometimes, if an am'rous Qualm should seize
My Mind; I strait fair Amaryllis chaunt,
With heaving Bosom, and with waxen Arms,
And all the Charms, that Lover's Fancy warm'd
Depaints transcendent.  But, sad change of Fate!
Too soon, alas!  the short-liv'd Bliss decays;
And I reluctant must again ascend
The frigid Regions of my bleak Abode:
Thus Pris'ner, on Parole but just set free,
Whom Hunger, Bonds, and Vermin long y' rackt,
Joyful in Liberty, his Heart dilates,
And with his Friends in chearful brimming Bowls
Drowns former Cares, unheeding what's to come,
Till time expir'd returns him to his Cell,
And curses him again with all his Woes.
