MURROGHOH O CONNOR AND OWEN SULLIVAN.

OWEN.
My old Acquaintance, and my dearest Friend,
My Murroghoh!  what Joys on you attend!
Ten thousand Blessings seem at once to shine
Upon your Farm and House of Ballyline.
Since you're restor'd to Native Land and Ease,
The World's your own, and use it as you please:
Now tell the Glories of your noble Name,
How Prince O' Connor from Hispania came,
Sprung from Milesian Race, of great Renown,
By right of Conquest made this Isle his own,
Landing at Shannon's Mouth, the noble Flood
Enrich'd Ierne with his Royal Blood;
For from his Loins, as from her flowing Springs,
Our Irish Veins are fill'd with Blood of Kings.
But I, alas!  can no such Honours boast,
Since sweet Rhincarah, dear Ivr'ah is lost:
My Blood runs low, I'm poor and in Disgrace,
And dare not own I'm of Milesian Race;
You top the World, as great a Monarch are,
As Conner Sligo, Connor Faly were;
And at your Ease beneath Arbutus laid,
Leaning against the mossy Tree your Head,
With Harp, and Voice, the College Praises sing,
'Till Woods and Rocks, the College Praises ring.

MURROGHOH.
'Tis true, to sing her Praises is my Choice,
She shall for ever have my Harp and Voice:
To her I owe the Happiness you see,
'Twas she restor'd my Farm and Liberty.
For which full Mathers to her Health we'll drink,
And to the Bottom stranded Hogsheads sink,
Good stranded Claret, wreck'd upon our Shore,
And when that's out we'll go in search of more.
Whole Nights we'll spend, to Break of Day sit up,
Then Deogh a Dorus for the parting Cup.

OWEN.
My dearest Murrogh, I am glad to find,
So much Content and Pleasure in your Mind:
But I poor Owen, grieve, lament and moan,
You see I'm packing up, and must be gone.
My bended Shoulders with my Burden bow,
And I can hardly drive this limping Cow.
Not long ago, which gave me Cause to fret,
A Sea Hog at the Scallogs broke my Net.
The Sea did not up to Rhincarah flow,
Mangerton's Top was black, and wanted Snow.
With mournful Song lamenting, the Bantee
Foretold the Ruin of my House and me.
When all these Omens met at once, I knew
What sad Misfortunes must of Course ensue.
But tell me, Murrogh, what the College is,
There's nothing more I long to know than This.

MURROGHOH.
Owen, I was so foolish once, I own,
To think it like our Little School in Town;
Or like the School that's in Tralee, you know,
Where we to Sizes and to Sessions go,
And when arrested, stand each others Bail,
And spend a Cow or two in Law and Ale;
I might compare Drumcom to Knockanore,
Curragh of Ballyline to Linamore,
With much more Reason &mdash; But, my dearest Friend,
The College does our Schools so far transcend,
Or all the Schools that ever yet I saw,
As Karny's Cabbin is below Lixna.

OWEN.
But what good Fortune led you to that Place?

MURROGHOH.
To tell my Suff'rings, and explain my Case.
To be restor'd, to find a just Redress
From those who glory to relieve Distress.
'Tis true I lost my Landlord's Favour by't,
But then, dear Owen, I regain'd my Right;
All my Renewal Fines with him were vain,
Nor Pray'rs nor Money cou'd my Farm obtain;
What cou'd I do, but to the College run,
And well I did, or I should be undone.
There did I see a venerable Board,
Provost and Fellows, Men that keep their Word
Sincere and Just, Honest, and Fair, and True,
Their only Rule is to give all their Due.
No Bribes or Interest can corrupt their Minds,
Unbias'd Laws the rich and poor Man finds;
Alike to all their Charity extends,
E'en I a Stranger found them all my Friends.
Such were the Saints that once possess'd this Isle,
And drew down Blessings on our happy Soil.
They soon (for Justice here knows no Delay)
Gave this short Answer, Murrogh, Go your way,
Return, improve your Farm, as heretofore,
Be gone, you shall not be molested more.

OWEN.
Happy Milesian, happiest of Men!
Then Ballyline is now your own again.
'Tis large enough, tho' not a whole Plowland,
And has a lovely Prospect to the Strand.
Tho' Bogs and Rocks deform that Spot of Earth,
Consider, Murrogh, that it gave thee Birth;
Those Bogs and Rocks your Cows and Sheep surround,
Keep them from Trespass Pledge, and starving Pound.
Thrice, happy you, who living at your Ease,
Have nought to do but see your Cattle graze,
Speak Latin to the Stranger passing by,
And on a Shambrog Bank reclining lye;
Or on the Grassy sod cut Points to play
Backgamon, and delude the livelong Day.
When Night comes on, to pleasing Rest you go,
Lull'd by the soft Cronaan, or sweet Speck Show,
When Kircher'd Sheelah strains her warbling Throat,
In tuneful Hum, and sleeps upon the Note.

MURROGHOH.
Dingle and Derry sooner shall unite,
Shanon and Cashan both be drain'd outright,
And Kerry Men forsake their Cards and Dice,
Dogs be pursued by Hares, and Cats by Mice,
Water begin to burn, and Fire to wet,
Before I shall my College Friends forget.

OWEN.
But I must quit my dear Iv'ragh, and roam
The World about, to find another Home;
To Paris go with Satchel cram'd with Books,
With empty Pockets, and with hungry Looks;
Or else to Dublin to Tim Sullivan,
To be a Drawer, or a waiting Man;
Or else perhaps some favourable Chance
By Box and Dice my Fortune may advance;
At the Groom Porters cou'd I find a Friend,
That wou'd poor Owen kindly recommend,
There cou'd I nicely serve, and teach young Men
The Art to Cog, and win their Coin again.
But shall this foreign Captain force from me,
My House, my Land, my Weirs, my Fishery?
Was it for him I those Improvements made?
Must his long Sword turn out my lab'ring Spade?
Adieu my dear Abode&mdash;
I shall no more with Brogue Boan Scribiogh climb
Steep Mulloghbert, enthron'd on Top sublime,
Head of my Clan, determine ev'ry Case,
To make my Vassals live at home in Peace,
To teach them Justice a much cheaper Way,
Keep them from Lawyers Fees, and Court's Delay?
Nor shall see you Curagh Can a Wee,
Full often have I made a Song for thee,
Lest some Disaster should attend my Life,
My tender Children, or my loving Wife.
Nor thee Knockdrum, where our Forefathers set
Upon thy lofty Top th' insidious Net,
To catch Desmonian wild, a Sight more rare
To British Eyes, than Scandinavian Bear.
Valentia too, I bid farewel to thee,
Title to best of Men, great Anglesey.
Desmond, tho' last, not least belov'd, farewel,
By whose great Lord whole Troops of Britons fell,
Thy Glories shall in distant Lands be known,
And all the World superior Desmond own.

MURROGHOH.
But stay, dear Owen, cosher here this Night,
Behold the Rooks have now begun their Flight,
And to their Nests in winged Troops repair,
They fly in haste, and shew that Night is near;
The Sheep and Lambkins all around us bleat,
The Sun's just down, to travel is too late.
Slacaan and Scollops shall adorn my Board,
Fit Entertainment for a Kerry Lord;
In Egg-Shells then we'll take our parting Cup,
Lye down on Rushes, with the Sun get up.
