Now through the Welkin wide the rosy Morn
Display'd her Charms, and with her Ray dispenc'd
Joy to the World; but greater Joy to none,
Than dawning glow'd in Willy's am'rous Breast;
This Day the Term of all his wonted woe,
Of doubtful Wooings, and of jealous Fears,
Gave to his Breast the matchless Moggy's Charms;
A blither Lass, than whom, with rustic Grace,
Ne'er bore the Bell, at Maypole-Dance or Ring;
She too with am'rous Flame his Flames return'd,
And with alternate Hopes and Fears bid hail
Th' auspicious Light, that crown'd their mutual Joy.

Th' attendant Maids, with ornamental Hands,
Now wait, with Geer less natural to deck
That Shape, which Heav'n had more adorn'd before,
Than all th' unwieldy Weight of artful Tire;
Each, in her proper Sphere, the Work begins,
And now confirms, now alters what begun,
Dislikes, commends, as Envy or as Art
Directs her Words; while she submissive stands
The Test of Eyes, on other Thoughts intent.

Nor less concern'd the Bridegroom was t' adorn
His crisped Locks, and bid his gay Attire
With outward Glare bespeak his inward Joy:
Nor wanted he maternal Care, to add
The nicest homespun Line, or Kenting rare,
The Work of tedious Hour or dreary Night:
His Hands, too proud to bear th' inclement Air,
Lay close invelopt in Hand-spurs neat;
These once his antient Grandame's Shoulders grac'd,
Her Neck incircling in their candid Folds,
When great ELIZA rul'd the willing World.
Three massy Rings upon his Fingers shone,
Such as the Roman Chiefs were wont to wear,
To fence their softer Hands from wintry Blasts.

A doughty Knight his Steps did near attend,
Mc Farrel hight, whose Ancestors well known,
For unmatch'd Deeds, and warlike vast Exploits,
Stand foremost in the antient Rolls of Fame;
Proud of his Birth, in Majesty he stalks,
Snuffs, and looks big, and glories in his Name,
His Name being all which he is Heir to now;
A trusty Blade fast by his Side was girt,
Which once had arm'd his aged Grandsire's Hand,
With Rebel-Rage t' oppose his Monarch's Right;
A Silver Circle round his Beaver shone;
Nor wanted he, his manly Hair to deck,
The graceful Ribband; which with artful Tie,
Low pendant rustled in the sportive Air;
A True-love Knot in Ribband too y' wrought,
The Badge of his high Office, grac'd his Brow,
And with fierce Glare confronted ev'ry Eye;
As who shou'd say, beneath Love's Banner thus
Confirm'd, I dare the proudest Foe to Arms.

And now attendant Troops in order wait;
This Party claims the beauteous Bride their care,
And that awaits the Bridegroom's high Behests.
The Bride, the fairest of the Female-Throng,
Up-mounted sat upon a Jennet fair;
Fairer than that, which from a neigh'bring Copse,
As Poets sing, Adonis Steed entic'd,
Whilst him in vain the Cyprian-Goddess woo'd.

The Bridegroom, next in gayety and place,
Rode high exalted on a stately Steed,
Whose bounding Feet indignant spurn'd the Ground:
Before him, near his Saddle's sturdy Bow,
Two Pistols shone, within whose Iron-Wombs
Dread Thunders lurk'd, to fright the Rival World.

Before them, Leader of the jovial Crew,
Old son'rous Sawney rode, on such a Steed,
As great La Mancha's Knight bestrode of old:
Down from his Drone a Scarlet Flag there hung,
Ensign of War, but War of am'rous Strife,
Of meeting Joys, and combating Desires.
Beneath his Arm a Leathern Bag he plac'd,
Where Mirth and Dole in Magick durance bound,
Lay close immur'd, and as the Time and Place
Requir'd, with artful Squeeze he both dispenc'd;
Not the fam'd Youth, whose Name long since enroll'd
In British Story, yet cou'd equal thee,
Tho' less'ning Crowds his tuneful Hand obey'd,
And naked Step-Dame, and performing Fryar,
From all the Joys, that Love and Beauty yield,
He led triumphant thro' sharp bri'ry Brakes,
Thro' devious Mountains and unpittying Rocks;
Whilst they, unheeded of the Pains they bore,
Charm'd by the Notes, thro' all th' encircling Harms
Dance on ensanguin'd.  Thus the jovial Crew
Move on, and with gay Chat, and wanton Glee
Shorten the Way, until the sacred Dome
They nigh approach, when each deft Country Lad,
With awkward Compliment, and rural Cringe,
Close the Side of the gay rustick Fair;
So sprightly Chaunticleer, when vig'rous Warmth
Inspires his Limbs, active, with nimble Flur,
And Wing demiss, the coy Dame Partlet wooes.

And now, the sacred Ceremony past,
Each Party moves in slow process along,
Till they remand into paternal Hands
Their grateful Charge; The good old Pair, with Tears,
That flow'd from Joy intense, salute their Bliss;
And Blessings upon Blessings from above
Crave to descend, and with their kindly Dew,
Enlarge the growth of Happiness and Love.

And now elated by the sprightly Fair,
And Cup enchanting, ev'ry jolly Swain
Culls from the Crowd, the Mistress of his Breast;
Here with full many a wanton Maze they tread
Alternate Measures, and with airy bound
Grace oft the various Motions and the Dance;
Now Face to Face, while many Sounds inspire,
They meet, retire alternate, and pursue,
With many a Wheel, and sounding plause of Hand,
In honour of the Bride and Bridegroom giv'n,
They crown the Dance, and end the sportive Fray.

Ye lovely Nymphs, whose Motion and whose Eyes
Inflame your Poet's Soul, inspire his Lays!
But chiefly you, ye fair Tyronian Maids,
Who breathe on smooth Drumravia's flow'ry Banks,
Soft vernal Air, accept this proffer'd Lay:
For who, than ye, with nimbler Tread can move?
Or featlier foot it on the russet Lawn?
Or who, than ye, diffuse more lucid Rays
Of pointed Beauty, which enquiver'd lye
In ev'ry part, Face, Feature, Waste and Limb?
Gods how I'm fir'd!  by the fair Objects fir'd!
Oh!  wou'd kind Heav'n to crown my height of Bliss,
Consign me sole belov'd to one of these!

No sooner dark, but ev'ry Table show'd,
Crown'd with a mighty Bowl, replenish'd well
With that fam'd Liquor, Mortals here below
Strength Bolcan stile, but, by the Gods above,
Life's Liquor nam'd; for Gods above full well
This Liquor ken, from whose enliv'ning Warmth,
In this, if Story fails not, Phoebus laves
His fiery Face, and from its Heat acquires
New Rays, wherewith to gild the following Day.

Here all around each jolly Toper sat,
Great as a God, with Wine and Beauty crown'd.
Health to the Bride, a joyful Glass is drunk;
Health to the Groom the second Cup proclaims:
The Mistress next the flowing Bumper crowns,
Full as their Love, and flaming as their Breast;
Nor wanted here full many a wanton Wile,
And Nod, and secret Beck, and am'rous Leer,
Whereby each Lass right certainly might ken,
Whose Name inscrib'd sat deepest in the Breast
Of Youth enamour'd:
Nor Jest there wanted by old Letcher broke,
To force too deep a Red from Bridal Cheek;
A happy Minute, and an easy Way
To Worlds unknown went round; whilst Eyes askance,
Still view the Bride, and by their wanton Looks,
And Leers, the slily dubious Meaning tell.

And now the Night far spent, a goodly Dame,
Of ruddy Aspect, and enormous Size;
Grown grey in Feasts, and Mouth of all the Crew,
That with brown Toast, and humming nappy Ale,
Drown all the Cares that Life or Wedlock bring,
Heaves thro' th' opposing Crowd her lab'ring Weight,
And mumping thus addrest the giddy Throng.
"Hear all ye Lovers, who e'er hope t' enjoy,
Believe Experience, for I tell you true;
When I &mdash; How the Gay Thought revives my Soul,
And cheers the Cockles of my drooping Heart!
When I &mdash; But ah!  that golden Minute's fled,
First joyn'd my Hand, (a joyful Day I ween)
Each Hour I counted, and each Moment seem'd
T' extend it's Length, and double ev'ry Pace,
'Till that wish'd Hour's approach, long wish'd by me;
And who one tedious Minute check'd my Joys,
Him most my Foe I deem'd:  For shame arise,
The Bride's a Woman too &mdash; Nay blush not Baby,
Many a modest Maid has long'd to grace
A lusty Lover's Side; fie, fie begon,
I must not see you here; go try who first
Shall gain the Lass ador'd; from bridal Hose
The quick or ling'ring Bliss receive."
This said they all arose with eager Haste;
The Bride withdraws, whilst modest Fears attend,
But Fears, by Love and strong Desire, allay'd:
And now undrest, by those whose Hands before
Late drest her, more by unadorning deckt,
Pure, in her native Innocence she shone,
The more outshining, that the less she shone
In borrow'd Ornament:  Her Snow-white Skin,
The truest Emblem of her spotless Mind,
As soft and fair as Down Cygnean show'd:
But Gods forbid, that ev'ry mortal Eye
Such Charms should view, lest ev'ry mortal Eye
Seduc'd, shou'd hold your sacred Laws in vain.
The joyful Bridegroom, lusty as the Sun,
When from the East his Mattin-Carr he drives,
Attended by a Train of Youth, whose Blood
Fresh in their sprightly Vigour mantled high,
And with a morning Blush their Check distain'd,
Full boldly enters; whilst their Leader caught
By the fair Object, with a wide fixt Look,
Firmly his Eye encenters on her Charms;
'Till recollecting, with a vig'rous Spring
He storm'd the Bed, and seiz'd the trembling Prey.
So the keen Eagle when aloof he spies
A milk-white Swan; with Eyes intent, around
He views her well, and meditates the Prey;
Then with a Sowse impetuous downward darts,
And in his Talons holds the Captive bound.

The Stocking thrown, the Posset next came  on,
In slow Procession by a Matron born,
Who with full many an Olive-branch had dekt
The good Man's Table; whilst he, nigh her side,
With Breeches wide display'd, the Bed approach'd,
And thrice in Magick compass, round their Heads,
The wide containers of his Manhood wav'd:
"Be ye, says he, as in our time we've been,
The joyful Parents of a num'rous  Brood:
But take my Councel, Son, this Adage true,
I've often prov'd, by long Experience taught;
Not he, who swiftest from the Barrier breaks,
Ay gains the wish'd for Prize; an easy Pace,
And hanck retaining Hand still farthest wends,
Then spare the Spurs; and, as a Pledge of Love,
This from my Hand receive."  Thus the grave Sage,
And to his Hand presented straight the Cup,
Where various Sweets in grateful Mixture joyn'd,
Breath'd Aromatick, requisite to rowse
The Soul, by Labour too lethargick grown:
Thus, provident, when o'er the oozy Marsh,
Or bellying Bog the wild Hybernian roams,
With Care in Plyde, or Breeches he reconds,
(If these entire) th' enliv'ning cordial Warmth
Of roast Potatoe, which he still applies
To Mouth, when drooping, and from this regains
His pristine Vigour.
And now my Muse, be grateful to the Pair,
Withdraw the Crowd; extinguish ev'ry Light;
Leave them no Glimpse, but what their Blushes raise;
Give them the Dark, the pleasing Scene of Love;
Leave them encircled in each other's Arms,
To reap the Harvest of a plenteous Bliss;
Thou too withdraw, and with a grateful Hand,
Close up the modest Curtains of the Night.
