Of Man's important Bus'ness, and his Work
Of Nature, late and early, ev'ry Day,
Sing, my Pierian Muse; in Numbers sweet
As is my Subject, voiding all thy Wit
Uncostive, flowing forth in happiest Strains.

The Swain surcharg'd with plentiful Repast,
Or rural Banquet, or domestick Meal,
(Whether at Morn, when Turkish Berry adust
(Fell Enemy to Sleep, and Cause of Spleen)
Or Indian  Leaf suffus'd, with Fragrance bland
Comforts the Maw, or solid Oat-meal-Food,
Higher hasty Pudding&mdash;
Which heats the Blood of Caledonian Swains,
And warms the North; Or roast and boil'd at Noon,
Or well sawc'd Herbage with cold Lamb at Ev'n)
Full Fraught retires.  To House uprais'd on Mount
He hies, vile Eminence, convenient Site
For Walk unsav'ry, or to Garden side,
Where Breath of May and Odoriferous Flow'rs
Do qualify with Sweets th' offensive Scent:
Or where cool Rivulet with limpid Stream,
Running fast by, precipitates the Filth,
Purging the Dome:  Alcides so of old
Th' Augaean Stable rinc'd; thither repairs
The loaded Swain incontinent, to pay
Tribute of Ordure to the GODS of Earth,
Brethren of Molock.  Not the Eastern Shrine
Frequented more in Arabie the bless'd,
Where uplift Prophet, dubious, hangs in Air,
The Strife of Magnets.  In the Dome appears
A Graduated Seat, for infant Bum
Or veterean, built of Tree, Norvegian Spoil,
Or such as Dantzick yields, the Prince of Woods.
Here triple Hole discovers hollow Womb
Of Earth, dreadful to Sight, abhorr'd to Smell.
Up, from the putid Dungeon Fumes ingrate
Ascending, hurt the Sense.  Careful to ken,
Lest hapless he may light on foul Remains
Of dirty Clown, with Galligaskins loos'd,
(Oft fatal to the Purse, or Watch in Fob,
Which well rewards Goldfinders filthy Toil,)
Bending Oblique, his Postern he applies
To perforated Board, as erst were wont
Apollo's Votaries to submit their Ear
To Delphick Tripod, and receive Response
From Pagan Shrine; So here from end reverse,
Sounds are immitted, to invoke the Sprites
Of Darkness, and alarm the Powers of Night.
And now the Swain at ease, compos'd to vent
Embowell'd Food, from Nature's secret Stores
Discharges plenteously of every kind,
Corn, Fish, and Fowl, and Wine of various Taste
Caecubian or Falern.  What Earth, Sea, Air affords
(Vile Refuse of concocted Aliment)
With bountiful Effusion is bestow'd:
Bursting it flies, convey'd by force of Wind,
And tremendous Noise, sent downwards all at once,
With horrid Violence, like Aetna's wild
Irruption, and the fall of craggy Rocks
Inwards on Mount Vesuvius, or Nile
Spewing with all his Mouths into the Sea,
Or sulphurous Vapours, kindl'd in the Air
With Nitre, Conflict of Elements; So roars
The darksome Cell, with repercussive Sound
Of postern Gun disploded, which reports
Afar, and ecchoes from the vast Abyss.
Thus he, thrice happy, in luxuriant Stools
Voids the successive Gatherings of his Meals.
As when a Bee with balmy Juice replete,
And liquid Spoils of Gardens, taken short,
Flies hastily to waxen privy House,
In Hive, or hollow'd Oak, or Chimney top,
(Besmear'd with Soot, of Taste contrariant)
Or ruinous Wall; and laxative, refunds
(Sweet Voidance) all the Bev'rage of the Day.
Such Blessings Heaven ever has deny'd
To sinful Mortals, when astringent Food,
Or Body-binding Claret barrs the Port,
Painful Coercion, Cause of Inward Heats,
And fierce Distortions of Face and Trunk,
The GODS vouchsafe me gentle Stools and Air!
Mean time a soft Abstersive is prepar'd,
By Foliage of Fields or Books supply'd,
Of verduous Plant, cool Herb, or pliant Dock,
Delusive if unfolded; or Trefoyl,
IERNE'S vegetable Pride; or Hay,
Fodder of Man and Beast; or above all
Love-labour'd Sonnet; or some senseless Rhime
On the disdainful Nymph; or poor Conceit
Of paultry Scribler, starved as himself,
Be it in Verse or Prose; or smart Lampoon
On Church and State; All read with profit here:
Or Dutch-Man's Commentary, long and dull;
Or venomous Work of Critick, or Divine
Polemick; nor might Jove himself disdain
B&mdash;'s foul Paper at Coelestial Stools.
These straw the Place, and fill the mural Voids,
And claim the fundamental Office to wipe Bum.
Wonderful Bum!  Subject of Modern Wit
And hidden Cause, for to thy secret Pow'r
And kindly Operations, Nature owes
Motions of Wit and Mirth and joyous Thoughts.
When thou art open, Fancy flows apace;
But when retentive, Merriment's entranc'd
In Spleen, and lies in clouded Brain
Incarcerated; Medicinal Wood
Thy Porter, opes and shuts thy folding Doors
Still kind to me, propitious to my Verse.
