Down by the brook which glides thro' yonder vale,
His hair all matted, and his cheeks all pale,
Robin, sad swain, by love and sorrow pain'd,
Of slighted vows, and Susan, thus complain'd.

Hear me, ye groves, who saw me blest so late;
Echo, ye hills, my sad reverse of fate:
Ye winds, that bear my sighs, soft murmurs send;
Come pay me back, ye streams, the drops I lend.
And you, sweet Susan, source of all my smart,
Bestow some pity on a broken heart.

Happy the times, by painful mem'ry blest,
When you possessing, Robin all possess'd.
Pass'd by your side, each day brought new delight,
And one sweet slumber shorten'd ev'ry night.
My play your service, for no toil seem'd hard,
I rose to milking, tho' 'twas ne'er so cool;
I call'd the cows up; I kept off the bull:
Home on my head I bore the pail upright;
The pail was heavy, but love made it light:
And when you spilt the milk, and 'gan to cry,
I took the blame, and simply said 'twas I.

When by the haycock's side you sleeping lay,
Sent by good angels, there I chanc'd to stray,
Just as a loathsome adder rear'd his crest,
To dart his poison in your lilly breast.
Strait with a stone I crush'd the monster's head;
You wak'd, and fainted, tho' you found him dead;
Then from the pond I water brought your face:
Still, blue as bilberry, you cold lips did quake,
Till my warm kisses call'd the cherry back.

When looking thro' his worship's garden gate,
Ripe peaches tempted, and you long'd to eat;
Tho' the grim mastiff grow'd, and sternly stalk'd,
Tho' guns were loaded, and old madam walk'd,
Nor dogs, nor darkness, guns or ghosts could fright,
When Robin ventur'd for his Sue's delight:
Joyful of midnight quick I post away,
Leap the high wall, and fearless pluck the prey;
Down in your lap, a plenteous show'r they fall;
Glad you receiv'd them, and you eat them all.

When fair-day came, I donn'd my Sunday suit,
Brush'd the best pillion clean and saddled Cut.
Then up we got; you clung about my waist;
Pleas'd to be hugg'd, I charg'd you clip me fast:
And when you loos'd your hold, and backward flipp'd,
I held your petticoats, and never peep'd.
The posied garters, and the topknot fine,
The golden ginger-bread, &mdash; and all was mine:
I paid the puppet show, the cakes, the sack;
And, fraught with fairings, brought you laughing back.

Susan but spoke, and each gay flow'r was there,
To dress her bough pot, or adorn her hair:
For her the choicest of the woods I cull,
Sloes, hips, and strawberries, her belly full:
My hoard of apples I to her confest;
My heart was hers, well might she have the rest.

And Susan well approv'd her Robin's care;
Yes, you was pleas'd; at least you said you were.
In love's soft fire you seem'd like me to burn,
And sooth'd my fondness with a kind return.
At our long table when we sat to dine,
You stretch'd your knees, and mingled feet with mine;
With fattest bacon you my trencher ply'd,
And slic'd me pudding from the plumby side:
And well I wot when our small beer was stale,
You stole into the barn, and brought me ale.

But Oh, the soldier, blaster of my hopes!
(Curse on pretending kings, and papish Popes)
He came from Flanders with the red-coat crew,
To fight with rebels, and he conquer'd you.
His dowlas ruffles, and his copper lace,
His brickdust stockings, and his brazen face,
These are the charms for which you slight my youth;
Charms much too potent for a maiden's truth!
Soon on the feather'd fool you turn'd your eyes;
Eager you listen'd to the braggard's lyes;
And, scorning me, your heart to him resign,
Your faithful heart, by vows and service, mine.

True, he is gone, by our brave duke's command,
To humble Britain's foes in foreign land:
Ah, what is that?  The spoiler bears away
The only thing for which 'twas worth to stay.

But sorrow's dry; &mdash; I'll slake it in the brook,
O welladay!  how frightful pale I look!
Care's a consumer (so the saying speaks)
The saying's true; I read it in my cheeks.
Fie, I'll be chearful, 'tis a fancied pain;
A flame so constant cannot meet disdain:
I'll wash my face, and shake off foul despair,
My love is kind; alas!  I would she were.

Well says our parson; and our parson said,
True love and tithes should ever well be paid.
Susan, from you my heart shall never roam,
If yours be wand'ring quickly call it home.
