Since last fair Summer chear'd the circling year,
And with sweet influence Nature's wants supply'd,
How many thousand souls have left this sphere,
Sunk from the world, and in succession died!

Thou Being Supreme, who first created all,
Thou great, sole arbiter of life and death,
How short we flourish, and how soon we fall,
Like Autumn leaves dispers'd by Heaven's breath!

O ye blest Spirits, heirs of bliss divine,
Who perfect round the throne of God appear,
How hardly would you leave that height sublime,
To join a crowd of dying mortals hear!

Cautious, my soul, as o'er this turf you stray,
Charg'd with the sacred relicks of the dead,
Perhaps I now, unconscious, in my way
May crush the ruins of some hero's head,

Who once in arts or arms superior shone,
The very pride and flower of their day;
Alas!  none now their perish'd memory own,
Or finds distinction in this bed of clay;

Save where the scatter'd monuments of Pride
Some broken sculptor to the eye display;
While the poor turf-clad peasant here, beside,
Sleeps full as quiet and as well as they.

Here too, amidst the rest, some great ones lay,
Whose empty titles grac'd the lists of Fame:
Time's ruthless hand has swept them clean away,
And from the very marble torn their name.

Strange thought!  that man, unstable as the moth,
Should swell with pride, and menace with disdain,
When the least glance of God's avenging wrath
Can mix him with the dust from whence he came.

Beneath this pile a fallen fair-one lies,
Once a bright form as ever met the sight;
Death has for ever clos'd those magic eyes,
Where Beauty triumph'd with profuse delight.

Oft have we met her in our evening-walk,
When the rude bustle of the day was o'er;
Oft shar'd her smile, and heard her pious talk:
Ah, grief to think that converse charms no more!

These powdering elms, whose atoms cloud the wind,
The rugged furrows of this shatter'd tower,
Are all clear items to the thoughtful mind,
That warn him of his dissolution-hour.

Ah!  strikes yon clamorous bell upon my ear?
Each sound comes dismal as the dying groan;
'Tis a sad token that the moment's near
Which wafts some spirit to its final home.

Why droops my soul?  why this afflicted bent?
Why bursts this flood of voluntary tears?
Is it the gloomy prospect of thy end
That makes thee tremble, and alarms thy fears?

'Tis vain to mourn or dread a certain woe,
Contingent ills enough our steps await;
Full sure it soon will be thy turn to go,
And prove the nature of this untried state.
