In these lone walks, these melancholy isles,
Where ever-musing Silence holds her sway,
No lustre beams, no playful visage smiles,
No jocund talk prolongs the festive day.

Hence, far away, ye vanities profane,
Fantastic reveries, and themes unholy!
Come to my aid, with all thy pensive train,
In sombre pomp, O sainted Melancholy.

Methinks I hear some heavenly spirit nigh
In gentle accents whisper as I go,
"Let this sad tale detain thy wand'ring eye;
Its simple periods speak uncommon woe."

"In awful hope here rest the last remains
Of two fond brothers, high in youthful joy;
A victim That to Fever's burning pains,
And this did ruthless murderers destroy.

"Fraternal love had bid the recent grave
Ope to received one solemn sad adieu!
But ere his wish the pious youth could have,
His murder'd corpse the trembling sextons view."

Was it for this each gen'rous purpose shone,
Thy infant virtues, and thy youthful bloom,
To give to death a vic'try not his own,
An unexpected triumph to the tomb?

How awful thus to mingle with the dead!
Of wretched man to meditate the crimes!
How soothing yet to raise th' aspiring head,
And pant for virtue, and for happier climes!

What spectre that!  in list'ning, horror seems
Still ling'ring near her self-deserted corse?
O what were then thy black desponding themes?
And where, Religion, was thy heavenly force?

The savage front reveals the purpose fell,
The tyger's rage in Afric's wilds we dread,
The low'ring clouds tremendous storms foretell,
And serpents sting where rank Savannahs spread.

But where the seasons rule with milder sway,
In the blest scenes we consecrate to Love;
We fear no serpent in the pathless way,
No springing tyger in the verdant grove,

An angel's form an angel's mind bespeaks,
Yet the sweet maid forgot her tenderest ties;
With ev'ry grace soft smiling in her cheeks,
With ev'ry virtue sparkling in her eyes.

The modest blush that bid the roses fade,
The magic smile luxuriant in its play,
Th' unconscious softness all her looks display'd,
Her converse chearful as th' enlivening day.

These in sweet union form'd the sad deceit,
These hid the fatal purpose of the fair,
And ev'ry charm, with thousand charms replete,
In brightness veil'd the horrors of despair.

Ah!  what is beauty, what the roseate hue,
With all the sweet enchantments of the eyes;
If Heaven be not for ever in our view,
Nor pure Religion teach us to be wise?

The brightest charms but hasten to the tomb;
(So nature wills; her will must be obey'd)
But virtue points beyond the transient gloom,
And views those beauties that can never fade.

Oh!  if by nature thus confin'd our date,
Why with rude hand this feeble frame destroy,
As not enough the common woes of fate,
Reject the prospects of immortal joy?

Strong in yourselves, O learn, ye proudly wise,
Warn'd by the fall of this unhappy maid
In her own strength not virtue's self can rise,
Her triumphs vain without religion's aid.

Father benign!  teach then my wav'ring heart
In ev'ry scene to trust to thee alone;
Nor let me ever from thy love depart,
Nor rashly trust on aught I call my own.

And welcome then though early Death appears,
If thou, blest Virtue, be my humble praise,
"For honor'd age is not in length of years,
But in thy short-liv'd, if unsullied days."

Those when no more the orient sun shall rise,
Shall live again in everlasting light,
When the pure spirits breathe their native skies,
For ever vanquish'd death, and fled for ever night.
