Clad in a sable pall, now frowns the sky,
In negro-darkness o'er the visto'd scene:
Now sheeted sprights from restless graves do fly,
And now they trip it o'er the twilight green.

Perhaps still mindful of their wonted home,
Indulgent wait on dearest friends on earth,
In vehicles of air unseen they roam,
And oft frequent the place that gave them birth.

Perhaps a Lover's once deceitful breast
Proves the dire cause of delegated woe;
For how like happy spirits can they rest,
When love prov'd venal, yes, and fatal too?

The well-tim'd aid of Vesper's twinkling urn,
Directs my steps to yonder time-struck tow'r,
There, as in short-liv'd passion, oft I burn,
These melancholy musings thus I pour.

Full many a flow'ret blushing to the sun,
That scents the sweetness of the eastern morn,
Inglorious oft its little life does run
Nor ere the lily hand might once adorn.

Or near the bubbling of some weeping stream,
Oft its sequester'd sweetness did it breathe,
Where the coy damsel sleeps in pleasing dream,
Or where the decent graves in briery order heave.

Poetic youths in many an unknown home,
Musing in pensive wailings, oft we find,
Perhaps the thymy heath they saunt'ring roam,
Or court in wayward strains the fleeting wind.

The chilling blasts of icy winter's frost,
Too oft the virgin primrose nips severe,
And many a friend by Envy's breath is lost,
Nor claims a tribute of a sigh sincere.

How many Shakspeares have there liv'd alone,
And Drydens, thankless in their poorer day!
And many a pensive Gray, we've seen, unknown,
Nor to the world their tuneful honours pay.

Haply, on Edgar's hallow'd lips, the fire
Of Daedal fancy might have charm'd the day;
And, with the sacred veh'mence of his lyre
Might cheat the white-wing'd minutes fast away.

Yet still the breath of Penury severe,
Ah!  too untimely, nipt the tender shoot&mdash;
If such the first attempt, then much we fear
The product of our pains, "The rip'ning fruit."

The widow'd blackbird oft is heard to moan
Her hapless consort's melancholy fate,
And many a helpless swain now droops forlorn
O'er the dusk lawn, and does this tale relate.

But, still some breast with generous ardour glows,
To guard fair Science in this favour'd isle,
Not all to Poetry, and the Muse, are foes,
But deign the grace of an applauding smile.

'Twas Shenstone's choice to raise with gentlest care
The tender shoot of blooming fancy's tree,
To stamp a genuine mark on what was rare,
And bid each muse-fir'd poet "dare be free."

How oft, as through the Arcadian groves I stray'd,
The gladd'ning impulse did my soul inspire,
Or oft reclin'd as near each oaken shade,
Wake into extasy the Muse's lyre!

Each softest grace that beam'd from Virtue's rays,
See thro' his breast, with mutual ardor reigns!
His brow, for ever green with recent bays,
Shall warm with native fire his Poet's strain.

Oft did he woo the still sequester'd hour,
To calm the rising tumults of his breast,
At Virtue's shrine, some spotless strain to pour,
Whilst each tumultuous passion was suppress'd.

Sweet moralist! &mdash; The pride of Albion's coast,
Has fall'n a victim to tyrannick Death;
To Dods&mdash;y, me, and to his country lost,
When soft Leaner had resign'd his breath.

GRATITUDE, my  Sh&mdash;ne, bids me pay
This duteous tribute of a sigh sincere,
And, true to Honour's never-erring lay,
These accents mingle o'er thy sacred bier.

"Chearful, and safe, he took his road thro' life,
Nor did its dazzling pomp attract his eye,
The happiest always to avoid the strife,
Which ne'er the MANY pass unheedless by.

"Sweet Virtue's path full oft he did pursue,
His tenets guided by some Rev'rend friend,
And kept (nor vex'd in sec'tries mazy clew)
A steady course unto his JOURNEY'S END."
