O thou that glad'st my lonely hours
With many a wildly-warbled song,
When melancholy round me low'rs,
And drives her sullen storms along;
When fell adversity prepares
To lead her delegated train,
Pale sickness, want, remorse, and pain,
With all her host of carking cares,&mdash;
The fiends ordain'd to tame the human soul,
And give the humbled heart to sympathy's controul.

Sweet soother of my misery, say,
Why dost thou clap thy joyous wing?
How canst thou pour that artless lay?
Hast thou not cause to grieve,
That man, unpitying man, his rent
From thee the boon which nature meant
Thou should'st, as well as he, receive?
The power to woo thy partner in the grove,
To build, where instinct points; where chance directs, to rove.

Perchance, unconscious of thy fate,
And to the woes of bondage blind,
Thou never long'st to join thy mate,
Nor wishest to be unconfin'd;
Then how relentless he,
And fit for every foul offence,
Who could bereave such innocence
Of life's best blessing, liberty!
Who lur'd thee, guileful, to his treacherous snare,
To live a tuneful slave, and dissipate his care.

But why for thee this fond complaint?
Above thy master thou art blest:
Art thou not free? &mdash; yes; calm content
With olive sceptre sways thy breast;
Then deign with me to live;
The falcon of insatiate maw,
With hooked bill and gripping claw,
Shall ne'er thy destiny contrive:
And every tabby foe shall mew in vain,
While pensively demure she hears thy melting strain.

Nor shall the fiend, fell famine, dare
Thy wiry tenement assail;
These, these shall be my constant care,
The limpid fount, and temperate meal.
And when the blooming spring
In chequer'd livery robes the fields,
The fairest flowerets nature yields,
To thee officious will I bring;
A garland rich thy dwelling shall entwine,
And Flora's freshest gifts, thrice happy bird, be thine.

From drear oblivion's gloomy cave
The powerful muse shall wrest thy name,
And bid thee live beyond the grave,&mdash;
This meed she knows thy merits claim;
She knows thy liberal heart
Is ever ready to dispense
The tide of bland benevolence,
And melody's soft aid impart;
Is ready still to prompt the magic lay,
Which hushes all our griefs, and charms our pains away.

Ere while, when brooding o'er my soul,
Frown'd the black demons of despair,
Did not thy voice their pow'r controul,
And oft suppress the rising tear?
If fortune should be kind,
If e'er with affluence I'm blest,
I'll often seek some friend distrest,
And when the weeping wretch I find,
Then, tuneful moralist, I'll copy thee,
And solace all his woes with social sympathy.
