A solemn tremour steals across my breast
As I survey with awe the sacred place
Where soundly sleep, for ever laid at rest,
The mould'ring ashes of the human race.

Here reigns victorious Death, enthron'd in state,
Confess'd sole monarch of this dark abode;
Alike before him bow the brave, the great,
The rich, the poor, the vicious, and the good.

No jarring feuds disturb their calm repose,
In bonds of peace they here at last unite;
Hush'd is the murm'ring sound of human woes,
And all is silent as eternal Night.

Would here Ambition's restless sons repair,
Who deluge Europe's Continent with gore,
Learn of these shades, forget the rage of war,
And give at once their bloody bickerings o'er!

The regal monarch and the lordly peer,
The mitered prelate and the lowly swain,
Names and distinctions, are forgotten here,
And Title's empty boast is null and vain.

The martial rage that fir'd the warrior's breast,
The thirst of fame which rous'd the poet's lay,
The patriot's zeal, are all alike suppress'd;
Sunk in Death's shades in Science' heav'nly ray.

Around are strew'd the annals of the dead,
Instruction now unfolds her ample page;
Wisdom in ev'ry sentence may be read,
E'en untaught Youth may here become the sage.

An air of gloomy grandeur reigns around,
The deep-stain'd windows scarce the light admit,
With rich heraldic blazonments abound,
Or sacred subjects, chose from Holy Writ.

The sable 'scutcheons deck the hallow'd walls,
The sculptur'd marble courts the curious eye;
They pause and read &mdash; a tear of pity falls,&mdash;
Their breasts responsive heave the tender sigh.

See yonder ensign floating in the air,
That stately tomb, those instruments of death,
The sword, the shield, the crested helm, and spear;
Approach and read, some warrior rests beneath:&mdash;

"Here lies entomb'd an hero known to fame,
Who in the scene of action bravely died;
His valiant deeds immortal honours claim,
Long did he prove his country's boast and pride.

"Tho' here in death his mortal ashes sleep,
Yet lives his honour'd name for ever dear;
'Tis on his country's bosom graven deep&mdash;
They oft embalm his mem'ry with a tear.

"Firm and magnanimous, the hero's soul
Undaunted stood amidst the storms of war;
His deathless fame resounds from pole to pole,
And distant ages shall his praise declare.

"Tho' fierce in conflict, yet in manners mild,
His gen'rous breast with sympathy was mov'd;
Whilst, free from malice as the new-born child,
He fell lamented, as he liv'd belov'd."

Observe yon humble monumental stone,
That hangs against the Gothic pillar's side;
No needless sculpture does its face adorn,
Its style is simple, and devoid of pride.

To rescue from th' oblivious roll of death
The mem'ry of the pious character
Who lays entomb'd within the vault beneath,
It stands confess'd a sad remembrancer.

The Christian Pastor of a chosen flock,
Their Maker's laws he taught them to revere;
With soul serene he met the dreadful shock,
And look'd on Death devoid of guilty fear.

The poor ador'd him, for he lov'd the poor,
On them his chief attention was bestow'd;
They shar'd with him his hospitable store&mdash;
He fed their souls with pure celestial food.

To paint the death-bed of the dying saint
Requires the pathos of a seraph's tongue;
Fain would I trace the scene, but, ah!  how faint,
How far beneath the subject, is my song.

Attendant angels guard the heirs of grace,
Around their beds in silent watch they stand,
Soon as the awful change of death takes place,
To bear their spirits to the promis'd land.

Worn with excessive toils, his live ebbs out;
See where his friends surround his dying-bed;
Deep sorrow now and grief have struck them mute&mdash;
His weeping consort holds his languid head.

Mark, with big sorrow heaves her tender breast;
Those stifled throbs, that quick-descending tear,
Evince with him she only can be blest;
But ah, alas!  the parting scene draws near.

The grand attack of his last mortal foe,
Calmly resign'd, he now with patience bears,
Suff'ring with all the majesty of wo,
And comforting, by turns, his comforters.

Touch'd with compassion for the weeping throng,
The patient suff'rer now the silence breaks;
The feeble accents die upon his tongue,
But, gath'ring strength, at length he falt'ring speaks:&mdash;

"Weep not for me, ye sympathetic friends!
Forbid the causeless tears of grief to flow;
Rather rejoice that now my sorrow ends,
That I so soon shall quit this vale of wo.

"No anxious fears corrode this peaceful breast,
Resign'd I wait th' inevitable hour;
Sure, when from earth my spirit is releas'd,
To be with CHRIST my Lord for evermore.

"Thou dear fond partner of my soul, adieu!
I leave thee and my orphan babes to God;
Ah!  keep his gracious promises in view
When I am gone and laid beneath the sod.

"And, ye dear pledges of our mutual love,
Receive your dying father's last embrace;
Oh!  may that Pow'r, who reigns enthron'd above,
Inspire your tender hearts, with truth and grace."

Here did he pause; &mdash; he no more could say,&mdash;
His soul still breathes unutterable bliss;
His spirit gently leaves the smiling clay&mdash;
His death appears an apotheosis.

How diff'rent this from gay Antinous' death,
Whose sumptuous monument I see is near;
Mark how the youth resigns his forfeit breath,
Smit with remorse, convuls'd with ghastly fear.

He strives to pray, but pray'r is now in vain;
At length he cries, "Thou most indulgent God,
Thou blest Redeemer, who for me wast slain,
How have I trampled on thy sacred blood!

"Hell is a refuge, if from me it bide,
The presence of offended Deity,
Whose attributes and being I denied,
And dar'd his utmost wrath to fall on me.

"Remember this, ye gay deluded throng,
Who God and all his mercies have forgot;
Tho' kind indulgent Heav'n bear with you long,
Yet retributive Justice slumbers not.

"No ray of hope darts thro' impervious gloom,
Nor dawn of comfort doth around me shine;
Heav'n closing with my conscience seals my doom&mdash;
Its heaviest strokes but second those of mine."

Convulsions deep now seiz'd his feeble frame,
His wretched soul with horror stood aghast;
Forc'd to appear, tho' loath, she trembling came;
With horrid groans and oaths he breathes his last.

Just in youth's prime, with fondest hopes elate
Of lengthen'd life, he's number'd with the dead;
Sent to his final, dread, eternal state,
"With all his imperfections on his head."

Yon small white stone, emblem of innocence&mdash;
Beneath the same a sleeping infant lies;
The little sojourner was soon call'd hence,
Just peeps into our world, then gasps, and dies.

Ye weeping parents, now let me advise&mdash;
Dry up your tears, and calm your troubled soul;
Soon has your lovely infant gain'd the prize&mdash;
Just as its race commenc'd it reach'd the goal.

Grieve not that God has hous'd your tender plant,
Perhaps he saw the threat'ning storm draw near;
He graciously supplies its ev'ry want,
Fix'd in a richer soil and purer air.

Here, had it stopp'd, by fierce Temptation's pow'r
Perhaps it had been finally o'ercome;
But he foresaw th' approaching fatal hour,
And kindly call'd the little wand'rer home.

See where among yon radiant throng it stands;
Cloth'd in white robes, a glorious crown it wears;
A golden lyre plac'd in its beauteous hands&mdash;
A palm of victory it also bears.

Hark!  all at once they strike their sounding lyres,
Heav'n's golden courts re-echo loud the song;
The mighty theme each raptur'd spirit fires,
And bursts of praise resound form ev'ry tongue.

Perhaps (if you obedient prove to grace,
And live a life of faith and holiness)
It may, commission'd, when your change takes place,
Convey your spirit to the realms of bliss.

Yon splendid monument, which breaks to view,
Rear'd by the hand of Opulence and Art,
Contains the ashes of a patriot true;
The letter'd urn can all the tale impart.

"Here lies beneath, in hopes of future bliss,
His country's boast, the mirror of the age;
To gain a better world he quitted this,
And died a patriot, pious, good, and sage.

"His country's bark, thro' rough tempestuous seas,
With wise prudential care he cautious steer'd;
Tho' threat'ned oft by Faction's hostile breeze,
From rocks and quicksands yet he safely veer'd.

"No venal passions lurk'd within his breast,
Disinterested love was graven there;
Pro Patria was the motto of his crest,&mdash;
O save my country, Heav'n!  his dying pray'r.

"Scarce has his sun pass'd Life's meridian blaze
(Still shone with beams superlatively bright),
When, suddenly divested of its rays,
It sunk behind the veil of endless night.

"The breathing statue, or the letter'd urns,
Are cold memorials of his honour'd name;
Each breast acquainted with his virtue burns
And glows to emulate his well-earn'd fame."

What sounds are those that strike upon my ear?&mdash;
The solemn murmur of the deep-ton'd clock;
It peals a knell which warns me to prepare,
And tells a lesson in each lengthen'd stroke.

Then shall I slight the solemn caution, giv'n
Within the awful precincts of the dead?
Sure, 'tis the friendly warning voice of Heav'n,
Whose love and mercy in its tones are read.

Can we elude the vigour of our foe,
Tho' health, youth, beauty, all at once unite?
Think not by these to depreciate the blow,
These the grim tyrant's fiercest rage excite.

Can Galen's sons, who boast their healing art,
With all their nostrums stop the dire disease?
Can they extract the poison from his dart,
And bid the grisly monarch's havoc cease?

Can gold, all-pow'rful gold, with Death prevail,
And bribe him to relax his stern decree?
At last the eloquence of gold must fail&mdash;
It cannot purchase immortality!

Why shrink with terror from the silent tomb?
It leads to life; tho' dull, yet short, the way:
Your Saviour's presence shall disperse the gloom,
And cheer the passage to eternal day.
