Now, the long labour of the day forgot,
Homeward the ploughman drove his weary team,
Gay shone the window of the village cot,
Reflecting bright the sun's departing beam.

I left, with eager joy and gladd'ning haste,
The busy town to luxury and care,
In greenwood groves, and flowery fields, to taste
Th' untainted gale, and breathe a purer air.

Long while I wander, heedless of my way,
O'er many a plain, whilst chance my footsteps led
Where, by a gloomy grove conceal'd from day,
The house of justice hides the ruffian's head;

I saw, and not unmov'd, that awful scene,
Whilst soft compassion dropp'd a pitying tear;
When, lo!  the voice of anguish from within,
And sighs of woe I heard, or seem'd to hear.

Bent down with chains, a prisoner I survey,
For gentle pity urg'd me to the place;
On the cold ground in humble grief he lay,
And his pale hands conceal'd the mourner's face.

"Peace to thy griefs, unhappy swain," I cry,
"And heaven-born comfort wipe the falling tear!
"Nor peace, ingenuous stranger," he reply'd,
"Nor heaven-born comfort, deign to sojourn here.

"Alas they fly these mansions of despair,
Nor with the midnight murd'rer deign to dwell!
Then haste thee hence, nor thus, with fruitless care,
Explore th' unhonest sorrows of my cell.

"And yet, if touch'd with pity of my woes,
Candour may listen to a murderer's fate;
Bear with me, whilst my sorrows I disclose,
And faithful to the theme my tale relate.

"Ingenuous stranger!  know, my years of youth
Were pass'd in peace, with virtue and with worth;
My parents led me in the paths of truth,
And fortune smil'd deceitful on my birth.

"Where Arden's neighbouring woods the valley shade,
My sire a few paternal acres till'd,
And, justly partial to the blameless trade,
He train'd me to the labours of the field.

"And from the straw-roof'd cot, and village vale,
I never, never, form'd a wish to roam;
'Till pleasure, pictur'd in a partial tale,
Poison'd my soul, and lur'd me from my home.

"Forc'd to the shade by autumn's sultry beam,
Of London's pride the livery'd menial told,
Of the gay joys that grac'd his constant theme
Raptur'd I heard, and languish'd to behold.

"Then, the fond object of my wish to gain,
Patient of toil the daily task I bore,
And not unanswering to my constant pain,
With gradual increase grew my little store.

"At length, the time so long desir'd obtain'd,
To go, with eager gladness, I prepare,
And my fond father's friendly voice disdain'd,
Nor, O my mother, heard thy softer prayer.

"Sleepless I pass'd the last long lingering night,
With fond impatience blam'd the slumbering sun,
And long ere dawn of day my fatal flight
To London's walls I took, and was undone.

"Launch'd on the tide of vice, with impious speed
Headlong I rush'd, and quickly gain'd the goal:
Ah, now afresh the wounds of conscience bleed,
And the dread story harrows up my soul!

"Urg'd by the voice of lust, the plot was laid,
And the 'lone traveller bled beneath my knife:
The partner of my guilt the guilt betray'd,
And swift-pursuing justice claim'd my life.

"The pains of death I fear not:  other woes
Torment my soul, and urge me to despair;
For you the bitter tear of anguish flows,
Oh injur'd friends, and venerable pair!

"How will ye brook the story of my shame,
Soon, my dear parents, to your village borne?
How will ye brook to hear your William's name
Quoted by malice in some tale of scorn?

"Pure are my parents, e'en their very thought
Pure as the breath of heaven, from vices free;
Yet if my good old father fail'd in aught,
Alas, that failing was his love of me!

"Too fond his William's praises to declare,
Oft was he wont to boast my matchless truth,
And ah too oft, with partial pride, compare
His darling William with the village youth;

"And oft would boast, his neighbour swains among,
(Forgive a parent's pride) his William's form;
And on the dear theme as he linger'd long,
His eyes would glisten, and his heart grew warm.

"But now no more his William must he boast,
The little triumph of his life is done,
The little source of all his joy is lost,
And the sad sire must blush to own his son.

"When day's long toil was crown'd with evenings rest,
Thron'd in his wicker chair the good man sate,
Each village politician was his guest,
Stood round his fire, or loiter'd at his gate.

"And, rural statesmen, as his colleagues drew
Around, o'er some stale gazette would he pore;
And oft would sit and talk, for much he knew,
Of village tale and legendary lore.

"But now his bliss is past, his tale is done!
And all his friends, and all his joys, are fled!
Th' indignant hind the guilty cot will shun
That shrouded once a murderer's hateful head!

"No more in summer seek his elm-tree's shade,
No more in winter seek his social fire,
But all th' unfeeling rustics of the glade
Will shun, with cruel scorn, a murderer's sire."

He ceas'd:  and, tortur'd with the pains of woe,
On the damp earth in speechless grief he fell;
And turning thence with pensive steps and flow,
I wav'd my hand, I could not say farewell.
