Light lie the Turf upon Pomona's Bard!
The Tankard's Blessing soberly bedew
The Lip of Him, who harmoniz'd her Chime!
My pensive Seats, at thirsty Hour of Noon,
Let PUNCH imbalm!  while from the gaudy Day
Sagely inshrin'd, with solitary Hand,
At decent Interval, the spacious Bowl
I fill, I finish.  Hail, mellifluous Stream!
Aetherial Blessing!  Multiform, yet mix'd,
In kindliest Harmony!  What tho' my Cups
The tasteful Showers of Ausonian Hills
Temper no more; nor Grape of shelvy Loire
Delight, Recorder meet of Nymph divine;
Tho' round my vacant Board disconsolate
Sour Famine stalks, and what more chill Mischance
Annoys the ungenial Noon of Him, who views
Thro' the dark Visible of Figures dim,
A Factor's broad Palm shadowy o'er his Lands,
Beck'ning Retreat; yet thy assuasive Balm
Atones for all, Oblivion fetters soft
The Stir of Thought, and seals the Eye of Care.

Add yet, my breesy Citadel ascends
The annual Echo of Lucina's Name,
(Less tunable the Plaint from stol'n Amour,
Whether or Justice sage, or private Squire,
Smit with the rural Arm of Damsel coy,
Have us'd their Might, on Population's Toil
Intent) nor studious of the vocal Chime,
Nor skill'd, in Chair contemplative sweet pois'd
My pensile Limbs, I quaff the silent Balm.

Oft too, unmindful of the heavenly Muse,
In Meditation of my Ills, I climb
The Mart of Trade, and providently wheel
Thro' Crouds, and Dirt, and Noise, and hostile Forms,
With Hands, and Head, and Cane, and battling Feet,
My wary Corpse; then Chimney-sweeper greet
Vocal, in Cassoc of staid Wisdom's Hue,
Or Ass ambiguous 'neath the Pannier Load,
Or Syren shrill, or Oyster-crowned Nymph,
Her loose Locks dripping with the Naiad Dew;
My grateful Hands mean while, by Venus sent,
Sage Hermes strews with medicinal Bills.

Thus musing on I win my Way, nor fail
With reverential Pause, at the Approach
Of Lud's dire Cliffs, my Orisons to pay
At Ashley's balmy Cistern, where the Tide
Fountful, broke forth Original, where steams
Thy Palace high of Odors; whose wide Gates,
Prompt he, for Albion's Glory, not his own,
Inflam'd with public Love, unbarr'd to all,
Impervious late, but to the silver Bough.
Hail, Sire Inventive!  Friend to Thirst!  the Lip
Moisten'd by thee shall ever chaunt the Praise
Of PUNCH, and with her Praise thee, Ashley, name!

Oil'd by the magic Juice, recover'd Way
I seize, and in brown Majesty ascend
The aery Height, with unsupported Feet.

Nor seldom with more lenient Finger mild
In Coffee-Room, the Ledger's gentle Page
Sollicit I, as bleak the North Wind keen
My toiled Pinnace on the wintry Deep,
Blows devious wide, while Sorrow chills my Frame
Aetherial; the mild Populace, whom lead
Congenial Counsels to the self-same Bower,
Throng round, and conscious of the clammy Board
Suspend the Wing, (as Bees the Suburb sweet
Of their Spring Palace, newly pav'd with Balm,
Clustring, frequent) while near th' incumbent Bowl
From me in Sorrow never distant far,
The ample Board imbrowns from Side to Side
Immeasurable; round we couch, a still
But steady Band, as in proclaimed War
The closing Lines of Albion, a fix'd File,
Invest some mighty Citadel, firm bent
To shake her Base, tho' perilous deem'd; so we
(But fix'd on Peace) or as the gallant Crew,
While sleeps the Trade-Wind on the eternal Deep,
'Mid spicy Odors with broad Brawn impel
The stately Barge of some proud Ammiral,
All bend, all dip, in Harmony compleat,
The well-tim'd Oar, unanimous; high flies
The cheerful Tide; so numerous we, in smooth
Attuned Toil, till by prolonged Cups
The Genius of the Circle moves amain;
Then Wisdom dawns, Joy and Atchievement high
Sits pleas'd, the Contest burns, the indentur'd clerk
To Speculation springs, the Brow of Trade
Battles for Mirth, the Mariner adust
His thirsty Soul expanding to the Balm,
Horrific grins an iron Smile; to me
Other thy Cups!  what Time in Knighton's Vale
Their neat Repast consign'd to Elegance,
Of Love, and blue-ey'd Burneby, the Bower;
While yet I teas'd the Ringlets of her Hair,
With Neck reverted, and sweet-glanc'd Regard,
Coyly rebuking, as her Hand intent
Touch'd the light Dainties of no vulgar Lyre.

Nor less the Dew nocturnal I pursue
Amid my classic Haunts, delicious Seats,
Of Trinity, where glides in milder Charm
Thy circling Joy, the Brothers to the Vine
Dismiss the Vow (the Doyly high uphung
Bleach'd in the Winds) but all at shady Eve
Thick as the vernal Bloom, assemble round
The Mitchell's Urn, in Love of her Regale,
All stretch their Hands, nor will their Poet chaunt,
Tho' sweet his Shell, the Mitchell unador'd.

By thee inspir'd, or unreplying Purse,
Chimeless and slow, I meditate the Floors
Of courteous Biscoe, by whose Aid, serene
My Pencil glides, as oft at vacant Noon,
I view, unsilver'd by a Shilling's Ray,
The comely Wreath sweet pendant on my Bowl.

With PUNCH bedew'd, the Soldier's Pedantry,
The Priesthood's Zeal, the Senate's Eloquence,
The Bench's Mirth inelegant, wise Wealth,
The Traveller's loose Heart, the Courtier's Smile,
The brittle Vow of the obdurate Fair,
All, all subside; the mortal Tear I wipe
With mortal Hand, and chase the unhallow'd Care.

Thus while in Dalliance with my native Bowl
Full simple Bard, her Solace I recite,
And gaze unweary'd on each endless Charm,
The Factor's Web winds round my joyless Land;
And now no more to Albion's chalky Bourns
The stately Bark my Canes delicious Sweet
Obsequious rolls, or Heart-reviving Rum;
Dry sits my Bowl, ineloquent my Shell.

Thus some irriguous Valley laughs awhile,
But if the Gods the honey'd Shower suspend,
Her Dew-deserted Beauties quickly fade,
The ruddy Vi'let, the wild Eglantine,
The Daisy py'd, the gentle Primrose pale,
And Hare-bell, vary'd with hundred Hues.
