The ev'ning sun declares the day is spent:
The drum's tatoo and fife's responsive glee
Each soldier bids retire to his tent,
And leave the world to sentries and to me!

Now o'er the camp scarce gleams the twilight ray,
And all is hush'd throughout the whiten'd plain,
Save in the rear occurs some wanton fray,
Or from the mess-room sounds a jovial strain.

Save that from yonder cliff, where breaks the wave,
The pickets challenge strangers seen below;
And such as pass, nor countersign may have,
'Till morn, in rear, or quarterguard bestow.

Beneath the cloud-rob'd moon where lowly rise
Those tents, &mdash; in each, the measure of a grave,
Five crowded vet'rans close their low'ring eyes;
Such is the bed of Honour &mdash; and the Brave!

'Tis but one shot, and each no more may hear
The loud reveillee greet the op'ning morn;
No more the angry adjutant shall fear,
Or haste for guard his person to adorn:

No more for him shall Kate the soup prepare
With verdant cresses, and wild marjoram sweet;
No more with him, the soldier's ration share,
Or Sunday's walk, or pay-day's welcome treat.

Oft in the embattled field, he'd danger face;
As oft returning with his constant Kate:
How jocund then the sun-burnt pair embrace,
How quaff their nut-brown ale, and smile at fate!

Let not the agent of their dues beguile,
Or mulct the comforts of the veteran band,
Nor peaceful tenants of this happy Isle
Neglect the men, who fought, and saved their land!

The patriot's speech, &mdash; the gentle courtier's place,&mdash;
And all that power can give, or flattery get,
Await alike some paragraph to grace:
The grant of honours lead to the Gazette!

Despatches ne'er record the soldier's name;
Senates vote thanks to armies in the mass!
Yet may each soldier have a separate claim,
And noblest service may unheeded pass!

Perhaps within that canvas cell may rest
Some genius formed for stratagems and war;
Some partizan that might have taken Brest,
Or engineer, to plan it, from afar!

But them no military school inform'd,
No schemes of war did show, no tactics teach;
They knew not why, &mdash; they yet the fortress storm'd!
They knew not how, &mdash; they got within the breach!

Full many a child of nature and of love,
Known to no parent, thro' the world doth stray;
Full many a star which makes the heaven above,
Doth gleam unnoticed in the milky way.

Perhaps some village NELSON may be there,&mdash;
For star and ribbon, with a Corporal's knot;
Perhaps the tent some private veterans share,
Worthy the gallant LAKE'S high honor'd  lot!

To wield Britannia's thunders o'er the main,
To lead her warlike troops with vengeful arm,
Her laws with temper'd wisdom to sustain,
To rule her councils, and avert th' alarm,

Their lot forbade!  nor yet alone did bar
The rise of genius, but the growth of crime;
Forbade to make a shameful trade of war,
And manage contracts in a foreign clime!

The claims of rival merit to suppress,
The better thus to make their own appear:
The tale of victory with art to dress,
And gain by garbled truths their Sovereign's ear!

Yet &mdash; e'en the humble veteran to raise,
Tradition gives the story and the song;
Rude, yet alluring, are the notes of praise,
That cheer the march, and urge the line along!

Look, gentle stranger, on that parchment roll;
Their names thou'lt read &mdash; for thou canst read &mdash; they say;
Their humble virtues too &mdash; the nether scroll
In simple truth and language doth display:

"Ne'er did they leave their arms to rust a spoil:
Ne'er vilely barter shirts of shoes for gin;
Ne'er skulk their duty &mdash; or refuse their toil;&mdash;
Ne'er feign a tale to take their captain in."

Tho' far from glory's summit, and the meed
Of mighty actions, wide recording fame,
Yet, for their country, were they proud to bleed,
Whilst brother soldiers praised a soldier's name.

For who to coward infamy a slave,
Fled e'er untimely from the well-fought day?
E'er left his foe the laurel of the brave,
Nor felt one willing, warlike wish to stay?

On some fond love proud honour still relies,
Some praise from Nancy still the heart requires!
E'en when in glory's field the soldier dies,
E'en from the cottage glowed his martial fires.

For thee, &mdash; who ask'st the soldier's humble worth,
Who waits this evening's chill in solemn mood,
Haply his comrades say &mdash; "He trod this earth
With love and honor, for the wise and good.

"His mien was careless, and his manners gay,
Yet now he'd sudden knit the pensive eye;
And now with folded arms, he'd musing stray,&mdash;
Then smile and pass the gloom of fancy by!

"Of late we mark'd him on the trim parade
With hair loose-tied, nor shoes, nor gaiters clean;
But yester morn we saw him slowly tread
From yonder hut, &mdash; at noon too was he seen;&mdash;

"The evening came &mdash; nor at his tent was he,&mdash;
Nor on parade was seen the gentle lad;&mdash;
The night crept on and shadow'd o'er the lea,&mdash;
And Laura wept, and Damon's heart was sad!

"The morrow saw  him borne on sable bier;
His sword and helmet o'er the corpse were spread;
The grave and merry gave him each, a tear:
And e'en the Muse, &mdash; there, last sad honours shed."

EPITAPH.
Kind was the youth, &mdash; and honest too,
Who rests his head beneath this stone;
For most he felt another's woe,
And most the faults that were his own.

The sage's lesson, &mdash; poet's theme,&mdash;
Alternate filled his raptured mind;&mdash;
But happiest was his fancy's dream,
Of friend that's true, and love that's kind!

Nor seek now further to disclose
Or aught of frailty, or of worth;
The God of Battles either knows,&mdash;
His trumpet's sound shall call them forth!
