The Midnight Justice now devoid of Care,
Began to slumber in his Elbow Chair;
Long had he wak'd, but now his Trade was o'er,
Nor cou'd expect a single Shilling more:
The Watch had cry'd "past One" with hollow Strain,
And to their Stands return'd to Sleep again;
Grave Cits and Bullies, Rakes and squeamish Beaus
Came reeling with their Doxies from the Rose;
Jephson's and Mitchell's Hurry now was done
And now T&mdash; K&mdash;'s (so Rakes ordain'd) begun:
Bright shone the Moon, and calm around the Sky,
No Cynder Wench, nor straggling Link-Boy nigh;
When in that Garden, where with mimic Pow'r
Strut the Mock-Purple Heroes of an Hour;
Where by grave Matrons Cabbages are sold,
Who all the live-long Day drink Gin and scold;
There 'neath the Covert of an humble Shed,
Thither by Chance, or by Appointment led,
Thomas and Susan on their Seives reclin'd
In Notes alternate open'd thus their Mind:
The neatest He of all the Porter throng,
The fairest She the Basket Nymphs among.

THOMAS.
Suky, ah!  Suky, long have I complain'd
Of Love rejected, and of Vows disdain'd;
Long have I told you with what pleasing Art
Your soft bewitching Eyes have stole my Heart;
But you, too cruel Lass, whene'er I moan,
Laugh at my Sighs, and bid me Sigh alone.

SUSAN.
Laugh at thy Sighs?  Who, Tummas, cou'd forbear
Thy doleful Ditties, and thy Tales to hear:
Too shallow Tales! &mdash; for sure I am more wise
Than think that Hearts cou'd e'er be stole by Eyes:
Long have I stole your Heart; yet simple Swain,
Still of a bleeding Heart you oft complain:
&mdash;No, Tummas, no &mdash; to such false Men adieu:
Who wins my Love, must win by speaking true.

THOMAS.
Ah!  luckless Lad!  was ever Fate like mine!
Ah!  faithless Lass!  was ever Scorn like thine!
Whate'er I say thou with too quaint a Skill
Turn'st my plain downright Words to what you will;
Suky, howe'er my Thoughts may be exprest,
My Pain's your Pleasure and my Love your Jest;
Howe'er you'd seem, you can't so Simple be;
But None so Blind ar' they who will not see....

Hiatus in MS. Valde Deflendus.

SUSAN.
As t' other Morn on yonder Bench I sat,
And careless hung aside my cropt Straw Hat,
A gay young Spark, as fine as any Lord,
Stopt, and spoke to me of his own Accord;
Tho' with a Ribband cross his Shoulder drest,
And something wond'rous glitt'ring at his Breast,
Yet did he kiss me &mdash; with a Kiss so sweet&mdash;
And something whisper'd, which I'll not repeat:
If, Tummas, such fine Folk will deign to sue,
Other-guess Lovers may I hope than you.

THOMAS.
Ah, Suky, trust not to an outside Show,
Much Danger oft lies hid within a Beau;
Flow'rs gay to Sight may fragrant smell no more,
And tempting Fruit is rotten at the Core:
But if, proud Maid, you still my Suit disdain,
Others will sue to me, and sue in vain.
Welsh Peggy, who has been so noted long
For Quickness of her Feet as well as Tongue,
With Hotpot mild, and quick inspiring Gin;
But neither Hotpot, nor yet Gin can prove,
Charms strong enough to force neglectful Love.
For while to her I drink, my Heart's so true,
I, 'stead of saying Peggy, cry, Dear Sue....

Alter Hiatus in MS.

SUSAN.
But from T&mdash; K&mdash;'s see where the Rakes appear,
Returning Home, and tell the Morning's near;
The Market fills &mdash; hear, hear the pleasing Sound
Of Hot Ox-cheek and Barley-Broth around;

THOMAS.
O then, my Love, no more our Joys delay,
But to the Parson kindly haste away.

&mdash;Away they jogg'd adown Southampton-street,
And sought the Wry-neck'd Parson of the FLEET.
