My hard-bound muse, with straining and with pain,
With more than child-birth throws, alas, that voids
Her stiff and filthy excrements, accepts
The subject with affection fond, a kind
Of love maternal, and thus tunes the song:

O T&mdash;D!  how highly art thou priz'd by man!
The common standard thou, by which he rates
The worth of what deserves his best regards.
Equal with thee the courtier holds his friends,
The man of pleasure her who made him happy,
The saint his species, moralist his god,
And Virtue all, unprofitable guest!

The choicest viands that luxurious art
Invents, are all for thee:  thee to produce
Bend the full tables at the costliest banquet.
To gain materials for thy fabric, man
Wears out his life in labour; thou'rt the end
Of all:  an emblem thou how vain the toils,
The pleasures, honours of the world below.
Full oft we seen thee lift thy curling spire,
Proud, o'er the grave of those who once were prais'd,
When Flatt'ry's dumb, and from the mould'ring tomb
Time tears the trophy, and blots out the name;
Thyself a trophy, which the Carian queen,
Who fondly eat her husband, once preferr'd
Before the loftiest monument of stone;
The grand Mausoleum she rejecting, chose
To raise an humbler pyramid of T&mdash;d.

The greatest, proudest, and the fairest, deign
Their visits to thy shrine, thy rites perform
Daily and gladly too.  The monarch there
Low-bending bows the knee, nor kings alone,
But e'en immortals think thee worth regard,
For, of the Gods, as antient bards have sung,
Some were gold-finders, scavengers were some.

Thou, in thy passage thro' the human frame,
Not idle nor malevolent, impart'st
Beauty and strength, the glow of rosy health,
And force elastic of the sinewy limb.
When ripe for other state, thou art discharg'd
"Miles emeritus;" and in regard
Of this thy bounty, with what caution we
Shun to deface thy form with foot profane,
And turn disgusted from who trample thee!

Nor yet thy pow'r of doing good departs,
Phoebus his influence joining, thee we find,
In herbs and fruits unnumber'd, spread the field;
Whence future t&mdash;ds shall phoenix-like proceed,
Born of thy ashes, and a second time
Our bodies pass; for what is all our food
But revoluting t&mdash;d, fulfilling still
The circle mark'd by heav'n?  The daintiest dame
May thus the beggar's t&mdash;d, in herbs or fruits,
Disguis'd, to her nice mouth convey, and there
Chew with high gust, and from reflection sweet
Rise with new life, and bless the rich repast.

Nor food alone is t&mdash;d, but balsam too,
Lenient to wounds and swellings, if the nose
Have public spirit, and can bear small ill
For other member's greater good; hence nam'd
By grateful Boor, with rev'rence, "pilgrim's salve,"
More yet thy praise my muse intended, but&mdash;
My subject works another way &mdash; it must be so&mdash;
I sit uneasy &mdash; I'm in haste &mdash; let's see&mdash;
I want &mdash; oh, here &mdash; oh no &mdash; this filthy sheet
I dawb'd already &mdash; grass must do for fodder.
