Ye sacred nymphs, who on Parnassus' top
Attune symphonious lyres, thence wont to inspire
The daring genius of the laureat bard,
Deign you immortal aid; whilst touring high,
On wings expanded in the aether born,
Of potent Gin's unbounded pow'r, I sing.

Midst various butts, in phalanx order plac'd,
Of rum, from rich Barbadoes fertile coast,
Or brandy, produce of the Gallic clime;
Whose vivid streams and grateful draughts altern
Pleasure redundant yield; the vessel stands,
Of monstrous size, huge Heidelbergian tun.
O'er these astride the jolly god elate,
Young Bacchus with his bloated ruddy cheeks
Triumphant sits; with verdant wreaths entwin'd
His dizzy head, and opiate runlett crown'd.
To this as to the Delphian shrine erst flock'd
Myriads, to scan the events of future deeds,
So fast the rabble rout transported come:
Hither resort the jocund songsters blithe
That thro' the streets their merry ballads chant.
Oft here I've seen the lees of mortal race,
Whom want and hunger, dread companions, ey'd
With ghastly grin askance, quaff the rich juice,
Till the strong fumes intoxicate their brain:
Then he who late in cottage darkling dwelt,
Or cell obscure by glimmering ray scarce own'd;
Majestic pomp exerting, now assumes
Despotic sway; and with unsteady steps
Vaunting aloud, his regal will declares,
And an imaginary monarch reigns.
The humble mendicant in tatter'd garb
Of variegated hue, to brumal blasts
And penury, the poor man's guide, inur'd;
If the small pittance of his plaintive tone
Can purchase but a glass of potent gin,
His sole ambition's gain'd; nor splendid dress
Nor robes attractive of plebeian eyes
His admiration claim; benumming cold
No more he feels, but spurns the hoary frost;
And strait, unmindful of his former state,
Rapt in ecstatic bliss, exulting runs.
When from some street we hear melodious strains
Of Wallfleet oysters usher in the eve,
We thence to Gin's diffusive voice strength ascribe
The shrill stentorian voice.  Bellona's sons
Inspir'd by this, midst arms refulgent rush,
Braving the discord of the jarring helms;
And meet undaunted in terrific forms,
The meagre visage of unhidebound death.
But more its all-dispensing power's invok'd,
When mortals early to their labours haste;
Whilst cold Arcturus and the frozen wain
Shed influence unperceiv'd by human ken
I' th' spangled hemisphere; e'er Phoebus mounts
In bright Aurora's lap, his glaring car,
That with unerring circuit measures out
Grateful vicissitude of day and night.
Mean while th' imperious dames with jovial crew
Of prattling females, round a maple stool
Sipping vast goblets of belov'd bohea,
Their sland'rous news with never ceasing din
Promiscuous tell, till a reviving glass
Of this salubrious juice their malice stems,
And puts a period to their sage debates.
Nor does it to the ignoble motly herd
Confine its virtues; oft the rich it cheers
Whilst wine and brandy unregarded stand.
Inspir'd by this, the weary traveller
Benighted on the verge of danger tost,
Walks unappal'd amidst the noon of night:
Thro' drifts of snow the Caledonian loon
Maugre the force of blustring Boreas stalks
Disdainful, with a draught of this elate,
And whiff of foul Mundungus, stinking weed.
Its power Ierne's sons o'er boggy moors,
And Cambro-Britons on the naked tops
Of mountains bleak, with front serene display,
Secure with this 'midst elemental jars.

Hail mighty Gin, thou health preserving dram!
Of warmth productive, plenteous and cheap,
From gentle Thames to Danube's torrent fam'd.
Hail!  melancholy's foe, delightful bane
To pannic fear and care with furrow'd brow;
If the chaste bounds of moderation guide
Man's reason, else all good it strait subverts;
And human nature feels the dire effects,
Plung'd in abyss of woe and conscious shame.
