The sun just sinking shed a sickly ray,
Which palely glimmer'd o'er the darkening west,
When Henry, faint amidst his wav'ring way,
Stopt, listless stopt, his feeble limbs to rest.

Beneath a leafless tree he sat him down,
On the bare margin of a parch'd-up brook;
And many a glance his pale eye cast around,
And heav'n-ward gaz'd, with many a wistful look.

But ah!  no more for him fair Nature's face
Wore the gay smile of vital breathing joy,
As she was wont, when oft through boundless space,
Her works he trac'd, with Contemplation's eye.

Wasted by slow disease, in thought he pin'd,
Consuming sickness prey'd upon his frame;
Sapt all the active vigour of his mind,
And only left a shadow with a name.

"Yes, now I feel," he said, "life's dream is o'er;
And blooms no more, the wreath my fancy wrought;
Vain were my hopes, Death presses on before,
But I will meet him &mdash; as a soldier ought!

"And yet, 'tis hard to quit the flatt'ring scene,
Forsake the joys, which life and being gave;
With steady visage and unalter'd mien,
Join the still tenants of the dreary grave.

"And harder still, when Fancy holds to view,
My friends dear cherish'd on my native shore,
To bid these friends a long, a last adieu;
And ev'n resign the hope of meeting more.

"For them alone, Heav'n knows, I wish to live;
Without them, what were riches? &mdash; Baubles mere:
Poor all the joys that worldly pomp can give,
To the possessions of a friend that's dear!

"Yes, Fortune, though thou frown'st, when wealth and fame
Claim'd the warm incense of a thoughtless heart,
Thou gav'st me more in Friendship's holy name,
Than wealth, or fame, or titles can impart.

"Ye life's best blessings, ah!  a long farewel!
'Tis Heav'n's high will ordains, and we must part;
But still on you the closing eye shall dwell,
And the last pang shall tear your from my heart.

"Say, what is man, amidst this wondrous world?
A god to rule with heav'nly reason crown'd&mdash;
A jarring being, by wild passions hurl'd&mdash;
The weak worm's brother, grov'ling on the ground.

"In youth's gay morn, with conscious strength elate,
He eyes Creation's work and Nature's plan,
O'er all in fancy'd thought he rules in state;
And his proud heart exults in being Man.

"But view this mighty creature on life's stage,
His schemes attack'd by keen Contention's dart,
In all his actions mad'ning passions rage;
I blush to think he acts so strange a part.

"Ah!  weak is human nature, even the best,
So Heav'n decrees, oft sink beneath the load;
By chill misfortune, or disease oppress'd,
They scarce enjoy that being Heav'n bestow'd.

"Dare I complain?  I manhood's op'ning bloom,
When youth full blown had fill'd th' expectant eye,
With strength to totter only just to the tomb;
With judgment ripening only just to die.

"O heav'ns!  why was I spar'd amidst the storm,
When War's dread thunder roar'd around my head;
When Havock stern, stalk'd round in horrid form,
And number'd thousands with the silent dead?

"Oh had I perish'd in some glorious field,
Where many a brave companion breathless lay!
I had not now, alas!  been forc'd to yield,
To tyrant Death an unresisting prey;

"I had not liv'd to dream of future joys,
With thee, Louisa, in domestic life:
I had not listen'd to the syren voice,
When fond Hope whisper'd, thou might'st be &mdash; my wife!

"O rapt'rous thought!  extatic ev'n in death,
A momentary gush renews life's stream;
Will no kind angel, with his healing breath,
Keep up the vital flame &mdash; still let me dream?

"Ah no!  I wake &mdash; the dear delusion's o'er&mdash;
To heav'n alone I raise my suppliant eye;
Bless, bless Louisa!  from thy happiest store:
Unknown I lov'd &mdash; unpitied let me die!

"Die!  is it so to die?  ah!  what is death?
In the dark grave to lodge, to worms a prey;
Each fine sensation to resign with breath;
All hopes to quit of life's returning day!

"Is it not awful, dreadful in th' extreme,
Existence thus to lose, no pledge to have;
No sure foundation for some future scheme?
Is all uncertainty beyond the grave?

"To me not dreadful is the awful change,
I tread the path before by millions trod;
Yet still I walk through wide creation's range,
Through Nature fix'd &mdash; upheld by Nature's God.

"But is there then a God; where does he reign;
How is he fashion'd, and what is his form;
Are we to seek him on the flow'ry plain,
Are we to find him in the howling storm?

"In both; through all, his throne is boundless space;
His form to think &mdash; ev'n thought the task must leave;
The intellectual mind no line can trace;
The trembling heart dares only him conceive.

"But where's the proof a Being does exist,
Whose form eludes ev'n fairy fancy's flight?
Can sov'reign Reason with her banners list
Who hides himself from her all-seeing sight?

"Ah!  weak then is her sight; is it not clear,
That I and something real being have?
How came that I?  How came that something here?
Was it eternity that being gave?

"No; I, and what I see, from causes slow,
And these from others length'ning back the road,
To thought's tir'd eye, no farther can it go,
Eternal something must be &mdash; why not God?

"Is matter then that something, in whose womb
Fermenting particles all forms produce?
No; matter's motionless, still as the tomb,
Unless inform'd for animating use.

"See a sweet flow'r, impearl'd with early dew,
Spread in fair radiance to the op'ning skies;
Some pow'r unseen gives fragrance, form and line;
That pow'r, withdrawn, it withers, droops and dies.

"Can matter for itself think, act?  Ah no!
When the soul's gone, no more the body lives;
Intelligence not matter, I am so,&mdash;
Then pure Intelligence existence gives:

"For what but pure Intelligence could wing
The soul's rapt thought through Nature's boundless reign,
Shew through the whole life in perpetual Spring,
And bid it trembling hope, nor hope in vain?

"Then here I rest, no further doubt remains,
'Tis all clear sunshine of an endless day;
A Spirit infinite, eternal reigns;
Pure, independent, of unconscious clay.

"He fram'd this world; how awfully sublime!
And, wond'rous work!  he fram'd the human soul;
Gave matter thought, to measure endless time,
His essence actuates and upholds the whole!

"Heart-cheering thought!  'twas from him I receiv'd
This earthly being, which I now resign;
Nor let my better part with this be griev'd,
Nor 'gainst his laws, in thought or word repine.

"No, Father merciful!  thy will be done;
'Tis in thy mercy, in thy pow'r I trust:
Nor will I seek life's dreaded foe to shun,
I know that Thou art good, and wise, and just.

"Taught by that voice, which breath'd thro' Christ's pure frame
Its heavenly precepts in my ravish'd ear,
O'er life's rough road I've walked with honest fame;
Why should I shudder?  what have I to fear?

"Go, anxious soul, nor dread Death's ghastly form;
Secure thy Maker's arm, 'tis strong to save;
His presence fills all space, does dust inform;
Nor reigns in heav'n &mdash; more than the lonely Grave.

THE AUTHOR OF THE ABOVE ELEGY COMPOSED THE FOLLOWING EPITAPH, WHICH HE REQUESTED HIS FRIENDS TO PUT UPON HIS TOMB-STONE.
Seek not to know the sleeper's name,
By fate ne'er blazon'd on the rolls of fame,
Nor pass, O wand'rer, with an heedless eye:
Stop, view his grave, and give the heart-felt sigh.
A Friend he was, Companion mild,
A Soldier poor &mdash; and Nature's hapless child.
Here rests his dust, unanxious to be known,
For his soul's fate, he trusts in God alone.
