Fitly the patriarch sought the inspiring power
Of meditation at the close of day;
And mystery hath marked it for the hour
Of sacrifice, wherein to watch and pray.
Then angel visitation made assay
Of Abraham's faith and hospitable rite,
Then rested the Creator to survey
The six days' work maturing in his sight,
The illuminated, formed, and peopled infinite.

Even the gay worldling feels the touch of awe,
While in repose the winds and waters lie,
While day, and all day's vanities withdraw,
And as the twilight muffles earth and sky,
Colour and form, and sound and motion die:
For in that gloom and stillness is the sign
Of adoration, mute, yet heard on high,
Praise universal to the Power divine,
Creation bending low before Jehovah's shrine.

But what of time or place?  It is the fire
Within the heart, lights up the jubilee
Of faith and hope.  The prophet could retire
Each day, undaunted by the king's decree,
From care, from Babylon, from empire free.
With foes and danger compassed round, even then,
Though death was in the act, he bent the knee,
Indifferent to the praise or blame of men,
The burning fiery furnace, or the lion's den.

When sail the constellations and the moon
Along the depth of midnight atmosphere,
Or when the full resplendency of noon
Oppresses vision, Him acknowledge there,
Who light and dark distributes, month and year;
On him alone in heaven and earth rely,
Him without change, and without end revere,
Enthroned above all domination high,
Unknown, yet ever felt; unseen, yet ever nigh.

Nor less we find a language in the morn,
A monitor in the return of day,
An emblem in the joy to be new born
From darkness to the sun's all-cheering ray,
In every sight and sound a call to pay
The matin orison.  Let heart and head,
Let hand and voice that oracle obey:
Give every thought to heaven; and from the bed
Of indolence arise, as rising from the dead.

This done, beneath the sylvan colonnade,
That eastward skirts the lake, we wind along;
Screened by an avenue of chequered shade,
Green as the groves of oriental song,
Where Caliphs wander, or where Genii throng
The bowers of Paradise.  How bright a gleam
Incessant flickers the dusk leaves among:
So Heaven accords an interposing beam
Of mercy and of truth to life's lugubrious dream.

Fair stream of Flesk!  but mutable as fair,
Dependent on the chances of an hour;
This moment mild, translucent, debonair,
The next, impatient of the storm and shower,
All foam and fury, turbulence and power.
How dost thou picture forth our joy and woe,
Virtues that bless, and passions that devour;
Till comes the last and liberating throe,
And round about the streets the pomps of mourning go!

Welcome the close peninsular recess,
Whose groves and thickets from the heat invite;
Whose cool, whose dew, whose quietude, we bless,
Impervious to the sun's meridian height,
Each thickening shade increasing the delight.
Sour ringlets there betray the fairy hand,
The foot-print and the gambol of each sprite,
That greets the moon by water or by land,
Dances on lawn, or skims the furrows of the strand.

But hush &mdash; and either name them not at all,
(For best they love a reverence taciturn),
Or "neighbours" them, or "the good people" call;
For once provoked, they quick retort the spurn;
Spavin thy cattle, or thy corn-ricks burn;
For thee in pale sublunar foray prowl,
And toss thee on the tempest of the churn,
Hang thee like bacon-flitch in smoke to howl,
Or roast thee like a crab, and plunge in gossip's bowl.

They love in cavern or in mine to dwell,
They love upon the hurricane to ride;
Or wander fog-borne over moor and fell,
Or from the beetling promontory glide,
To look for shipwrecks on the heaving tide.
Lay, legend, cry of Banshee, they prolong,
Peopling with echoes every mountain side;
And breathe the spells of poetry and song,
In melodies that mourn and die the clouds among.

But longer in such reverie to rove
Befits not, near the consecrated pile,
That chastening with religious awe the grove,
To penitence and mourning gave asyle
In ages past from misery and from guile.
A symbol of hereafter, of repose
Where sorrow cannot wound, nor sin defile:
Forgiven and forgotten all our foes;
The trial past, and joy unspeakable the close.

Thy towers, forsaken Mucruss!  to the poor
Were once of hospitable aid the sign,
And, daily crowding through yon ample door
In serried files, came pilgrims to the shrine.
But time at leisure now may undermine
The pillar, and deface the mouldering wall,
And every pinnacle with ivy twine:
The burial rite alone remains of all
That once was crosier, chant, high-mass and festival.

And who can blame the peasant if he mourn
Even yet in fond remembrance of the past;
If even in death he cling to the sojourn
Of all his ancestors, or wish at last
His own remains beside them may be cast?
And if he think the virtue of such grave
May shorten Purgatory's fiery fast,
Pity his error, and its pardon crave
From Him who reigns above, Omnipotent to save!

Look through the portal &mdash; nave and choir, and tomb,
Stained with the damp, and strewn with many a bone,
And wrapt at every step in denser gloom,
To silence and to solitude bemoan
Their fallen estate:  one narrow arch alone,
At utmost distance, marks with feeble ray,
The sanctuary's recess, and chiselled stone.
So through the dun obscure of life we stray,
Yet welcome at the end a gleam of heavenly day.

What groans of dole and penance once dismayed
Yon cloister, buried from the sun and air,
Beneath the central yew-tree's giant shade!
Here hath the guilt-o'erburdened solitaire
Mused, till remorse was deepened to despair:
Here saints have fought their agonizing fight,
With anguish and temptation, doubt and care,
Till in the beatific trance of light
The world and the world's woe evanished from their sight.

The grass grows rankly, and the saplings wave
O'er hall and dormitory, porch and cell;
Each passage is a den, each aisle a cave:
But who shall tempt the vaults, or dare to tell
What inmates there of unknown horror dwell?
How sighs the breeze, how languishes the day;
What tenderness, what pain in the farewel
To these dismantled gates and turrets gray,
Once dedicate to heaven, still reverend in decay.

But hence we must &mdash; it yet remains to scale
The mountain, ere obstruction intervene
Of haze or tempest; gradual from the vale
We mount, and gradual fades the smooth moist green
To rough, adust, and barren.  So between
Ambition's early toil and late success
No path is to be found of peace serene:
The more our eminence, the comfort less,
Till the whole world at length be one drear wilderness.

What change upon the hills!  unclouded now,
On the pure bosom of the sky reclined;
Now in a moment round each furrowed brow
With what a chain invisible they bind
The vapours borne beside them on the wind;
Then cast the mantle off, then closer draw,
Above, below, before them, and behind,
Till all be turbulence, and winter's flaw,
Such as on Appenine the Punic chieftain saw,

And owned the ruin of the Alps outdone,
Yet still the darkness fluctuates:  and again
Like a vast curtain rises, while the sun,
Looking abroad in victory, pours amain
The deluge of his beams o'er lake and plain.
So when the tempter prompts, and passions fell
Make war on duty, frenzy clouds the brain,
Till the bright Sun of righteousness dispel
The foul distemperature, and all again be well.

Up Mangerton we go:  from prospect wide
To wider, and from pure to purer air,
The horizon opening as the hills subside,
And distance softening down the rude and bare,
As hope and memory picture all things fair.
Buoyed up with expectation and with glee,
We take no thought of labour or of care,
The spirits lighter, and the limbs more flee,
And half the burden dropped of gross mortality.

Nor pause we, till the crater's edge we gain,
The goblet named of Lucifer; a mound
Of curving precipice, wherein the drain
From cloud and fountain feeds the pool profound
That mantles in the midst.  Here let the sound
Of bugle to blithe echo wind the call:
And, hark!  the repercussive heights around,
Harmonious in contention, answer all;
And long vibrations ring through their aerial hall.

One effort more, and highest of the high,
Near the rude cairn, we breathe empyreal air:
Above, the deep cerulean of the sky,
Beneath, a boundless cirque of prospect fair;
Turk, and the Reeks, and Iveragh's ridges bare,
Lakes, rivers, meadows, woods, and mountains blue,
Bantry and Castlemaine, and wild Kenmare;
Till on th' horizon, outline, site, and hue,
Together blending, fade in dusk and doubt from view.

Pausing at every step, along the ridge
That over-hangs the concave on we stray,
Till now the rugged rampart like a bridge
Bestrides vacuity, and leads the way
Where right and left, astounded we survey
The vast abruption.  Reconnoitring slow
Lest the steep verge thy careless feet betray,
Behold the horse's glen; approach the brow,
Recoil not, shrink not from the fearful depth below,

But brace each nerve and cast a downward eye,
Where 'mid the chasm, ingulfed in waste and gloom,
Far, far beneath, the dismal waters lie,
And all around them, rock and heath and broom
Usurp dominion, leaving scanty room
Between the tarn and crag for one soft green
Of pasturage in the shattered wreck of doom
And deluge, where the ravages are seen
Of vengeance yet; where peace and hope have never been.

Look; but for safety to the heather cling:
Forbear discourse, and let no lighter tone
Of melody invoke the mountain king,
But one deep supplicating sigh alone
Be breathed; &mdash; he hears, &mdash; he answers, &mdash; the low groan
Of wild re-murmured sorrow awes the dell:
Again, more faint, the melancholy moan
Is heard of loneliness and fear to tell
And fainter yet again scarce whispers the farewel.

It is a sadness like the dying beam
Of day, the knell when passing spirits go
The strangely-blent vagaries of a dream,
Where present, past and future, friend and foe,
The near, the distant, hurry to and fro,
Mingling in shapes that earth can never yield,
Vicissitude and voyage, weal and woe:
Brief images of things from knowledge sealed
Of mortals, yet in part and shadow thus revealed.

Even here, in devastation and dismay,
The love of lucre, strong as death, detains
A thrifty hermitess, who day by day
From cream's rich unctuousness the serum drains,
And prints ambrosial butter, on the plains
Beside Kingsale, or Cork's famed city sold.
The seasons and their change, the winds and rains,
The moisture and the drought, the heat and cold,
And solitude like death, all please in hope of gold.

Behold her walking on the water's brink,
To where her kine seek herbage in the glen:
The roots her food, the mountain-dew her drink,
The caverned rock her magazine and den,
And little her desire for help of men.
Herself can work the churn, and scour the pail,
The docile herd herself can milk and pen;
And all her thoughts are handicraft and sale,
Till winter's tyranny dislodge her to the vale.

Day wears apace; no longer here sojourn:
The circuit of the crater's rim complete,
And to the stony entrance back return,
Whence borne on indefatigable feet
A world of youthful parasites, with sweet
Cajolery paged us down the mountain side.
But when their candied flattery failed to meet
The silver guerdon, changing note they cried,
"Bad luck to you; and shame such stinginess betide."

Down to the bay umbrageous of Dundalk
Repair we, where the boat and banquet wait;
There, carelessly diffused in sylvan walk,
Share we provision with our crew, and prate
Of peace and politics, of war and state;
Wealthy and high-born cavalcaders see,
Yet count our own of all the happiest fate:
For what to us are fortune and degree?
No poet so entranced, no king so great as we!

But converse must have end &mdash; the sun declines,
And ancient saws instruct us to take note
Of profit by his presence when he shines.
Thus warned, we quit refection for the boat,
Push off, and joy to be again afloat;
While, like the men of Athens, we pursue
Whate'er is found of novel and remote,
The conscious spirit straining to the view
Of worlds invisible, where all things shall be new.

Athwart the Middle-Lake our course we shape,
By many a wooded creek and lonely bay,
And rock strange-hollowed, and strange-cloven cape,
That gently meet us, gently slide away,
Like dreams departing at the break of day;
The while from our associates fable old
We glean of earthly and unearthly fray,
Mines where imprisoned goblins dig for gold,
And spells that never must to mortal ears he told.

Alas!  that cold oblivion should inurn
Too oft the glory with the mortal frame,
And scarce an echo from the grave return
Of all the toil, the triumph and acclame,
And ancientry and power, and deeds of fame.
Each cave, each headland as we glide along,
Of hero, or of saint records the name,
And all around us the memorials throng
Of conquest, monarchy, and war, and poet's song.

What pomp of verdure from each height descends,
Grove falling under grove, from steep to steep,
Till the thick foliage with the water blends,
Circling the shore in one continuous sweep,
And sinks into the bosom of the deep,
There mingling with the faint reflected gleam
Of clouds, that on the calm of evening sleep.
So down into the grave we from the dream
Of earth descend, to meet eternal glory's beam.

At length appears the outlet, to a span
Contracting suddenly the waters wide,
Where works pontifical, of modest plan,
From island to peninsular-woodland stride,
Beneath whose solitary arch we glide.
And issuing on the Lake of Lein, behold
The vapours settling on the mountain side,
All change of figure and of hue unfold;
Panes, cities, palaces of adamant and gold.

North-westerly our course:  while on the lea
Glena's wild nemorosities repeat
Each bugle note; till where of shade bereft,
The double peaks of Toomies' tower, they meet,
They mix with kindred resonances sweet,
Retiring to the realms of upper air,
And lessening die. &mdash; Not so the strains that greet
The soul heaven-mounting from the den of care,
The conscience without guile, the heart that burns in prayer.

Sequestered loveliness how stretch around
The sylvan undulations far and wide,
With what magnificence of shade profound,
What prodigality of pomp and pride,
O'er lawn and up the precipice they glide
And far above, in majesty austere,
What altitudes of rock the cloud divide,
Challenge the tempest, and delight to hear
The thunder and the wind in baffled rage career.

Landing, we plunge into the ascending glade
That clambers to the torrent's angry leap,
Surnamed of old 'O'Sullivan's Cascade.'
It roars, it sparkles:  cautiously we creep
To where, half bending o'er the giddy steep,
We gaze upon the never-ceasing flow
That shakes the forest; headlong to the deep
Precipitated from the bosky brow:
All shade and gloom above, all flash and foam below.

But now the winds and waters utter moan
Presageful of commotion:  downward bend
The labouring clouds; the promontories groan;
Low murmurs from each glen and cave ascend
Responsive; the far-spreading vapours blend
In shapelessness of dusk, cloud, water, shore,
Lost in the haze promiscuous without end;
And time is to he gone, ere danger more
Environ our retreat, ere will.  a deepening roar

The tempest and confusion worse confound
The lurid gloom.  In loftier ridges swell
The billows; and with long continuous sound
The surges wild and wilder whirlwinds tell,
With what a gust they in commotion melt.
Faint gleams amid the darkness show the spray
In eddies borne along the tumult fell:
Extinct is the last lingering spark of day,
And the moon hides her face in sorrow and dismay.

O for the vision of the sceptred sage
That never comes but with a guardian power
Amid the wreck of elemental rage,
Amid tornadoes when they blackest lour,
Amid the waves just opening to devour.
Whate'er the changes or the chances be,
The dread or danger, gracious is the hour
And omen, his meteorous light to see
On tower of Aghadoe, or Inisfallen's lee.

Joy &mdash; joy! &mdash; behold the venerable form,
The sainted king uplift his placid brow;
From vulgar sight enshrouded in the storm,
Or seeming as the waves that dash below.
The gifted eye alone hath power to know
What sovereign, in what guise delights to roam;
What hope, what comfort from his presence flow:
For when, emerging from his watery home,
He reins the courser white that prances o'er the foam,

The billows and the winds forbear to roar,
Or roar unheeded, impotent to harm.
A mighty potentate was he of yore,
And knew full well oppression to disarm
By law, and equity, and virtue's charm:
Where due, he lavished bounty and renown,
But from his palace drove the flatterer swarm
That bask in smiles and wither at a frown,
And fawn, and lie, and think all glory in a crown.

One day, amid the banquet and the hall,
He rose, and vented wild prophetic strain,
Borne on a cloud forsook the festival,
And plunged into the bosom of the main.
Yet privilege was given him to regain
At will these upper regions, there anew
To spread the blessings of his ancient reign,
And bid high fortune wait upon the few,
Who in the needful hour such apparition view.

Even now the gale before him sinks, while chide
The surges with less tumult on the shore;
And safely by the Prison-Isle we glide,
Or where on Cherry-Reef the billows roar:
And now again the treasury we explore
Of record, rumour, elves, and magic wand,
And Erin's rich traditionary store.
Time thus beguiled, all unawares to land
We come, and grounding boat, leap out upon the strand.

Beneath the battlements of Ross our bark
We leave, and ruminating home return,
Kindling with more than a Promethean spark,
Thoughts like Sidonian Cynosure, that burn
Amid th' obscurity of life's sojourn;
How war, and trumpet, and the minstrel's chime,
Must all lie mute in monumental urn,
And how beyond the grave we soar sublime
Into the paradise of heaven's empyreal clime.

How yearns ethereal essence to transcend
The limits of mortality and clay;
What rapture in the half-belief we lend
To tales of wizard eld, and phantom gray,
The Runic rhyme, the legendary lay:
What bliss in dreams emancipate to glide
Through present, past and future; to survey
The secrets buried under ocean's tide,
Or to new labyrinth of worlds o'er chaos ride.

Yet he not long a loiterer in the maze
Where sleep deludes, or fiction:  the supreme
In joy is on the majesty to gaze
Of truth, and from the world's delirious dream
Awake into the pure authentic beam
Of faith; and onward press (as strength is given),
Thought gradual following thought, theme following theme,
And cast away th' intoxicating leaven
Of crude philosophy for manna sent from heaven.

There is a sanctuary (howe'er unknown
To the world's worshipper) from doubt and care;
There is a palm of triumph, and a crown
That may be won by violence of prayer:
And meditation, like the mystic stair
In Bethel, upward leads from earth below,
To where immortal choirs the praise declare
Of Him at whose right hand the rivers flow
Of peace and joy that fill the Everlasting Now.

No more cherubic visitants descend,
As once at Mahanaim, or the hill
Of Dothan, in corporeal shape to tend
The patriarch and the prophet, or fulfil
On cities, hosts, and realms th' Almighty will;
Yet still repenting sinners they behold
With joy, and guard through tribulation still
The white-robed multitude, the sacred fold,
Of whom th' Apocalypse by elder's voice hath told.

And though the dread Triune for ever dwell
Beyond creation, beyond depth and height,
Beyond all knowledge, inaccessible,
Pavilioned in the majesty and light
Of his own beams; yet from that temple bright
His mercy looks, illumining the wise,
And piloting the watchful, till from night
And death they to th' eternal morning rise,
From earth's discordant din to angel harmonies.

There, kindling into ecstasy, the soul
Shall from perfection to perfection soar,
And years and centuries by millions roll,
While saints, sublimed to seraphim, adore
(As knowledge widens) ever more and more:
And still the triumphings that never end
Are but beginning on that blissful shore
Where glory and delight in union blend,
And in perpetual flight above all heavens ascend.
