Blow, tempest &mdash; thunder, roll; ye suit the gloom:
And if ye startle luxury from sleep,
Ye but awake him to remember doom,
Ye but forewarn him (lest oblivion creep
Upon his vigil) to repent and weep.
Dull world, bestir thee; kneel at mercy's shrine,
Ere retribution the dread harvest reap,
And answer none vouchsafe to prayer of thine,
Save the wrath fulminant, and chastisement divine.

How turbulent the night's capricious change
From calm to storm, from darkness to the beam
Of moon illumining the wonderous range
Of mountain, rock, and wood:  what lightnings gleam,
What clouds and meteors on th' horizon stream,
What whistling of the winds, what pelting shower,
Forbidding sleep, or vexing sleep with dream
Of din, turmoil and peril, and the hour
When hags come forth to ban, and monsters to devour.

Arise, and into the fresh morn repair;
Fresh morn how fragrant after such unrest,
Though little we espy of augury fair
Amid the storms that from each mountain crest
Roll downward to the valley, and invest
With equal haze the cliff and dingle green,
Long-Range, and Purple-Mount, and Eagle's-Nest,
Whose rugged fronts more terrible are seen,
And strike a deeper dread through clouds that intervene.

The stags that browze the forest, in bravado
Their antlers lock, half anger and half play;
Nor dream how soon, aroused by ambuscado
Of hound, of huntsman, and of gentles gay,
They must o'erswim the flood, or stand at bay:
So merciful is heaven (though few receive
Aright what reason and sound doctrine say),
Each creature thus in ignorance to leave
Of casualty to come, lest premature they grieve.

What gained the king of Israel, when he went
To learn at Endor (by unlawful art
Of wizard and familiar) war's event?
What balm could the prophetic voice impart
For wounded conscience, and a broken heart?
Enough the present:  who would live again
His past of being?  why invoke the dart
Of future ill, anticipate the chain,
Or woo, before the time, captivity and pain?

Then be not like the monarch; but repose
On heaven thy care, with not a wish to view
The future &mdash; look but to the final close;
And day by day, and night by night renew
The services of adoration due.
Leave others the diviner's art to try;
But thou thine even, onward course pursue,
In boisterous or serene, in moist or dry,
As moves the sun alike through bright or cloudy sky.

Our moralizing done, return we home,
Where ceaselessly bells ring and customers call;
Such banquet is in Gorham's ample dome,
Of race and stag-hunt such the festival.
The wanderer who had hoped in lonely hall
To loiter, and in lonely peace explore
The rocks and islands, groves and valleys all
Hears with affright the stentorophonic roar
Of landlord, waiter, guest, augmenting ever more

The many-throated harmonies of morn,
Each urban and suburban ear that greet,
The thunder of the wheels, the mail-guard's horn,
Steeds, donkies, coaches, tempesting the street,
Battle of cudgels, tramp of countless feet,
Hoofed, brogued, or bare:  carts rumbling o'er the stones,
Curs, children, pigs, the hurly to complete,
And jaunting-cars that dislocate the bones,
And sallow mendicants, that mingle gibes with moans.

Pipes, hurdy-gurdies, trumpets, drums, astound
The crowds that every where confusedly run,
While swarm into the town from all around,
Jockey and Greek, and reeling ripe for fun
Or fight, tall lads whose shouts the welkin stun
Till the grave magistrate steps in between,
Whose voice, whose frown, whose Mittimus they shun:
For why the constables are near him seen,
And files of armed police in uniform of green.

Kind genius of the desert interpose,
And lead us car-borne to thy bower on high,
Where rock and solitude may round us close,
And meditation to the world may die.
Caparison the horse, and let us fly,
Unheeding wind or rain:  nor madly stay
Where strife preludes to challenge, and each eye
Glares like a comet, boding feud and fray:
Push on into the storm &mdash; the storm less wild than they.

As by St. Withold from the bosom driven
The night-mare and her ninefold brood retire,
And ecstasies unknown before are given,
New strength we feel, new faculties acquire,
All life and bliss and intellectual fire;
So, as we sally forth, the shout, the song,
The yelp, the buz, the dissonance expire;
And the companions sole that round us throng
Are thoughts that more to Paradise than earth belong.

If silence thus be melody, and ease
Be luxury, disincarcerated to rove,
And listen to the rustling leaves, the breeze
That soothes, the birds that vocalize the grove,
The Flesk, that murmurs like the widowed dove;
Think what the triumph and the jubilee
Of souls dismissed from earth to heaven above,
For ever happy and for ever free
Expatiating, and heirs of immortality.

The darkness and the gloominess behold
Of morn upon the mountains, where the shade
Of clouds along the dusky regions rolled,
Half hiding, and revealing half, hath made
A wilderness of night on copse and glade,
And all the frowning dreariness around;
Where sight is baffled and the heart afraid
To look on that obscurity profound,
Or enterprize approach to that forbidden ground.

Such darkness veiled th' Avenger who destroyed
The vaunted armies of th' Assyrian king;
Such darkness brooded o'er the formless void
Ere yet the overshadowing Spirit his wing
Outspread, ere yet the light began to spring
Such darkness hung o'er man; till love divine
The victory from the grave, from death the sting
Despoiled, and bade on Calvary the sign
Of mastery o'er the world and that old Serpent shine.

Along the lake, and up the giddy side
Of Turk, in depth dimensionless extend
The woodlands, towering high and spreading wide
In one unbroken verdure without end,
Mantle the slope, the precipice ascend
Above the clouds that in mid aether sail.
And though ten thousand charms of beauty blend
With that stern grandeur, yet the cheek turns pale,
And as we gaze, the pulse throbs quick, the spirits quail.

But who are they that mustering up the storm
Engarrison the gorge of yon defile,
And on the pendant hills encampment form,
Prohibiting access?  What shall beguile
Their fury, or what covert grant asyle?
With widening front their legions they outspread,
With murkier horror gloom on gloom they pile,
Cast night before, brew tempest overhead,
And mingle heaven and earth in darkness and in dread.

Glena and all his giant neighbours fade,
Enveloped one by one in vapour foul
Till total overwhelmed:  then wrapt in shade
Rush down the fiends:  the clouds in volumes roll,
Vancouriers to the thunder's distant growl,
From rock and heath the showers in smoke rebound,
The cataracts dash, the frighted forests howl
The horse, bewildered and aghast, turns round,
The driver and his fare sit helpless and half-drowned.

Rough music this of elemental war,
Now feigning intermission, now again
Redoubled, calling echo from afar
To summon all the magazines of rain,
Sleet, hail, and hurricane, that spout amain
Storm after storm, each heavier than the last,
Shaking the hills, and deluging the plain
In aggravated chaos:  earth aghast
Groans in Egyptian dark, and shrinks beneath the blast.

Still toward Kemnare we toil, to where the road
Hewn through the rock in canopy of proof
And gallery grotto-like, might seem th' abode
Of hospitable fairy; while aloof
Stand gust and shower, to let the weary hoof
Of steed or man rest quiet underground.
We entered:  and beneath that vaulted roof
Ensconced a goodly company we found;
And salutation frank of courtesy went round.

What zest, what solace in the covert given
By Oberon here or Archimago's wand,
That through the crag such corridor hath riven
So soothe our toil.  Ah!  let the heart expand
To see how marshalled by th' Omnific hand,
The hopes that elevate, the fears that quell,
In order due of alternation stand:
Pain, lest our pride wax wanton, and rebel;
And comfort, lest the heart o'ercharged to bursting swell.

Not long we tarry here:  our course is bent
To where the crags of Eagle's-Nest denote
A rendezvous; the ear is homeward sent;
Ourselves, enveloped close in cloak or coat,
(Like tortoise in its shell) expect the boat;
While tempest after tempest sweeping fast
Swells with Typhoean roar his angry throat.
In fissured rock we harbour from the blast;
Should winter's self assail, he must relent at last.

Thus perdu couched, we mark the straggling throng
Car-mounted or equestrian, the gay world
Of Kerry, troop storm-buffeted along,
Their high top-gallants to the gale unfurled,
Quaint caps awry, quaint chevelures uncurled,
Maugre the o'ernight's industry to fold
The ringlet, round and round in paper twirled.
Alas the draggled victims to behold
How shrinking from the wet, how shivering with the cold!

But this and more, will under name of sport
And hunting of the roe, be gladly borne
Like rout, assembly, etiquette of court,
Which, but for pomp and name, were woe forlorn.
The sluggard hath arisen at early morn,
The slattern pranked herself in trim attire,
The dainty dame of tax-cart thought no scorn,
The tippler left his can, the bard his lyre,
Such philter hath the chase, such puissance hath desire.

No need there is of courser here; and few
O'er precipice and bog, through briar and brake,
The track of huntsman or of hound pursue;
But far along the road procession make,
Or on the water side their station take,
Or wiser still (if weather smile serene)
Launch on the tranquil bosom of the Lake,
Whence every where rock, mountain, wood, and green,
Dog, sportsman, militaire, and beaux and belles are seen.

The storms abate, the boat arrives; the hour
Is nigh; the shouts from cliff to cliff resound.
See the scared eagle from his eyry tower
Aloft, on wide-spread pinions circling round,
Bidding the desert to his scream resound,
While angrily he chides the clamorous train
That violate his solitude profound,
Marring with idle luxury, tumult vain,
The kingly contemplations of his ancient reign.

O restlessness of man, that cannot leave
In peace the field, the river, and the wood!
O vacancy of thought, that must deceive
Life's tedium with false images of good!
Were the true source of blessing understood,
Such darkness would be lost in radiance bright
From Tabor mountain or from Jordan's flood;
Celestial visions would illume the night,
Thoughts redolent of heaven attend returning light.

List! &mdash; hear we not the cry of hound and horn
Amid the glens, upon the mountain's breast,
Heart-stirring as the feathered choirs of morn
When thrush and lark the prize of song contest,
And sweet as evening's lullabies of rest?
The sentimentalist may word it well,
The Stoic or the Cynic frown or jest;
But in that harmony there is a spell
To countermine the wise, and reason's self to quell.

How the wild music undulates along
Yon rocky channel; now remote, now near!
What expectation silences the throng,
Listening the peal that fainter or more clear
At length with swelling chorus fills our ear!
The heart beats audible:  the doubling call
Bids each in ambush wait th' approaching deer:
Some line the copse, some in the herbage crawl,
Some crouch in boat; all eye, all ear, impatience all.

He comes! &mdash; he comes! &mdash; be ready with the boat:
The very crisis of your fate is nigh:
Let him but plunge; then seize him while afloat,
And with loud shouts proclaim the victory!
Shame &mdash; shame, &mdash; We showed ourselves too soon:  his eye
Hath marked us; and he seeks a distant shore.
Of rage and mutual blame then rose the cry;
And (much I fear me) even our cockswain swore,
Who never after did, nor ever did before.

The game hath taken soil, and lost to view
Securely stems the wave; nor will a hound,
Till thrown into the stream, the chase renew.
Too late revive they there, too late have found
Cold puzzling scent, and vainly quest around
The further shore.  In safety's jubilee
The quarry, far ahead, hath come to ground,
Swallows the plain, and scales the steep with glee,
Once more the denizen of Turk and liberty!

But, hark a second cry denotes the pack
Divided, and foretels a second chance.
He comes! &mdash; the dogs close hanging on his track:
The lolling tongue, dun hide, and slow advance
Betray his toil:  observe with wary glance
His plunge; surround him, grasp his antlered brow,
And let the past mishap our joy enhance.
Exultingly we wave white banner now,
And high in air our arbutus-wreathed bonnets throw.

Resign him to the huntsman, and admire
His huge dimensions, and his branching head:
He seems the forest's venerable sire,
Or monarch who their armies long had led,
Though at his utmost need, the recreants fled.
Now finds he life and empire but a span,
While hood-winked he reclines, fast bound, half dead,
And yielding to the mighty power of man,
Patient awaits his death, as patient as he can.

Yet nothing fear:  thou art a captive king,
And of a king the treatment shall be thine:
Not long the bandages shall round thee cling,
Nor shalt thou long in doubt and durance pine.
Heave not, nor look so piteously:  resign
Awhile to bonds and fate:  a prospect fair,
A brighter destiny shall quickly shine,
And to thy native woods thou shalt repair,
To range the mountain free, free as the mountain air.

Meantime regatta-like in gallant show
Of boats with cabin or with awning gay,
We glide along the straits in lengthened row,
Or crescent-wise expand in opening bay.
Above them all, conspicuous in array
Of sumptuous gala, like a conqueror's car,
A stately barge divides the liquid way,
Where sits the lovely Countess, from afar
Diffusing light and joy like some benignant star.

I name her not (though worthy to be sung
By bard of olden time as Faery Queen
Hight Gloriana), though her crown be hung
On high, entwined with palms of deathless green.
The seraph path she walks, but walks unseen;
Nor dare I desecrate with earthly fame
One so in virtue shrined and faith serene:
Nor am I fitting to record the name
Which want and sorrow bless, and angels shall proclaim.

Glena!  let all thy fastnesses expand
On the freed prisoner refuge to bestow.
He starts &mdash; he springs into the flood &mdash; for land
He makes, and is once more a king!  see now
With what a grandeur, what a grace his brow
He shakes, and rides upon the wave.  Yet more
Elate he touches ground, bursts through the row
Of nets that, casual left, obstruct the shore,
Bounds to the wood and thinks of trouble past no more.

Scarce with such joy the Gallic monarch fled,
Escaping from the durance vile of Spain,
Bestrode the Turkish courser, felt his head
Encircled with the regal crown again,
And to Bayona sped in huge disdain.
Long rankled that immedicable wound
Of outraged majesty:  through years of pain
Imperial Charles by sad experience found
What policy it were, had equity set bound

To lust of empire.  Tyranny and pride
That grapple all, set all upon a east;
And giant power that earth and heaven defied,
Struggles, like shipwrecked seamen on a mast,
For life, not victory; and sinks at last.
But Lazarus at the gate enjoys within
The peace that, after brief probation past,
Shall progress of immortal joy begin,
While through eternity resound the groans of sin.

Our day's disport is done:  but wouldest thou hear
Th' halloo of other worlds, far different hour
Thou must await, to fast in station drear
Of lonely beach, and watch the cloudy power
That builds the mist into a signal-tower
For things invisible.  There let the spell
Of high-wrought fantasy thy thought imbower
Within that interlunar dark where dwell
The wonders which no tongue hath leave or power to tell.

Sad privilege (and therefore given to few)
To pry upon the secrets of the dead:
Bethink thee, lest the heavy price thou rue
To live, a spectacle of woe and dread,
No peace by day, no rest upon thy bed,
To roam, deserted as the stricken roe,
On the rough flint to lay thy houseless head,
And every balm of youth and hope forego,
Each sight a sight of pain, each sound a sound of woe.

How fearful 'tis to walk the haunted plain
When twilight glooms, or dews of midnight fall,
When wild-fire lures to death the fitted swain,
When corpse-lights glimmer in the witches' hall,
And revels not of earth the moon appal:
When paws th' infernal charger in the glen,
And fairies to the passing meteors call,
Or strange communion hold in wizard den
With many a giant shade that once were kings of men.

See from the mountain or the cloud rush down
The formidable Hunter of the deep,
His name, his race, his errand all unknown.
Wind, flood, and thunder with less fury sweep
Than his pale courser plunges o'er the steep
Prostrates the forest, shakes the wilds around,
Fire-snorting takes, with mane erect, the leap
Flies o'er the lake at one impetuous bound,
Then vanishes in air, or sinks into the ground.

Intrepid watchers have beheld the sight
(Some say) near Ivrelagh's Franciscan pile,
Or where St. Finian reared the abbeyed height
Of sanctuary upon the sacred isle,
Ere rapine and Maolduin dared defile
The votive ground, and mad with thirst of gold
Profane the cemetery's last asyle.
Even yet, such chronicle, by beldam told,
Hath power to thrill with dread the boldest of the bold.

But now what acclamations from our trance
Awake us to the business of the day:
For, as the rosy-fingered hours advance,
Impatient appetite is heard to say,
"A time for all things &mdash; why the feast delay?"
In wide promiscuous navy we forsake,
Glena, thy solemn amplitude of bay,
And o'er the roughening and cloud-darkened lake
Right eagerly our course to rest and dinner take.

In universal boat-race we return
To Inisfallen's steep but verdant side:
The rowers toil, they strain, they pant, they burn.
"Well pulled, my sons," th' exulting cockswain cried;
"Hurra!"  the sturdy mariners replied.
"Drag her along," vociferates he; and all
With a thrice-double zeal their vigour tried.
Severe the toil:  but sweet in Boatman's-Hall
To change the tug of oars for ease and festival.

Hail!  Inisfallen, hail enchanted ground,
In all th' excess of loveliness arrayed,
Amid the majesty of nature round;
Here open lawn, there close-retiring shade,
Inextricable maze of copse and glade,
The tufted eminence, the flowery dell,
The music by the murmuring waters made,
The rock, the grotto &mdash; vain attempt to tell
The numberless delights that in this Eden dwell.

But not this hour could contemplation find
Fit leisure here to meditate and pray;
So thick the beach, the mead, the grove, are lined
With groups that saunter in confusion gay
Awhile of mutual quizzing and display,
Then on the grass or trunk of tree recline,
Soothed by the wind and water's roundelay,
And carve the baked meats, and pour out the wine
In honour of the day, but more of beauty's shrine.

See lady bright with pearly crescent mooned,
Gipsy and clown with not a hat to show,
Slim youths, bewhiskered or bepantalooned,
And brawny boatmen on the beach below.
Age, manhood, and the vermeil-tinctured glow
Of youth, all bandying shout and repartee,
Not one mute tongue, not one o'erclouded brow;
While pleased the stranger and the tourist see
The isle abandoned all to frolic and to glee.

Some watch the rippling wave upon the shore,
Some walk the wildly-varied circuit round,
And each traditionary nook explore,
And the dim cave that hath memorial found,
For honour and confiding love renowned.
Now into figure glide the festive throng,
And dance begin:  say not they touch the ground;
For beauty floats in air, and skims along,
Charming and charmed, on wings of melody and song.

Time was, the pomp conventual here arose
Of transept, clerestory, nave and quire,
That from the world gave refuge and repose
To youthful acolyte, and hoary sire,
The lordly abbot and cord-girded friar,
Who once confession heard, awarded doom,
Or of devotion fanned the living fire.
They were; but are not:  in sepulchral gloom
They sleep, and memory's self lies buried in their tomb.

Here then one moment let me rescue still
From merriment that leaves no trace behind
And 'mid the fractured relics rove at will
Of cell and cloister; wisdom there to find,
Where weeds and ivy rustle to the wind,
And not a pinnacle remains to fall
Of niche or tomb that saint or hero shrined.
Arch, gateway, tower and porch are mouldered all,
Briars, nettles, mole-hills hide the consecrated wall,

Where now of noon, of vespers, or of prime,
No chant is heard, no ceremonial seen,
No preacher but the grave.  Relentless time,
Heavy thy tread, thy hand hath heavy been,
That scarce a bare foundation prints the green.
O death, all-eloquent (though slow is man
To hear thee), give us warning not to lean
On the bruised reed of earth, but while we can,
With faith and virtue fill of life the narrow span.

Wise, for a moment, was the Persian king,
Once weeping in ambition's mad career;
For awful truth can to the proudest bring
At times conviction sudden and severe.
Even now her monitory voice is here,
While to the distant sound of mirth and play
I listen with a melancholy ear.
A little while, and all the young and gay
Shall sleep with the departed, mute and cold as they.

Wealth, power, ambition, every hope and joy,
Are but a dream, a toy of painted air,
The full-blown bubble of a playful boy:
And if thou canst, philosophy, declare
What more than this thy schemes and systems are.
But yet in Gilead may be found a stem
That drops a balm for ever rich and rare;
There is a priceless pearl, there is a gem
That through eternity outshines the diadem.

Who would repine with such reward in view,
Or mourn the tenure frail of all below?
Or vent the rueful plaint, how brief, how few,
How empty, all the pleasures we can know?
Press onward, and look upward:  let the glow
Of faith and hope be quickened into flame,
And charity be liberal to bestow.
Meantime, resume the world; where shouts proclaim
On embarkation bent, peer, knight, esquire and dame.

From Inisfallen to the tower of Ross
(Where Ludlow and Muskerry fought of yore)
The waning twilight warns and guides across
Our slow-returning squadrons to the shore,
While dirge-like gales the close of day deplore.
Soft glides the boat along:  the waters foam
And sparkle to the dashing of the oar.
We land, we look a long farewel, and roam
With oft-reverted eye in pensive musing home.

Like the fond melancholy when we view
The floweret fade, or leaf in autumn fall,
Such the regret of parting and adieu,
Though hope, though pleasure, or though duty call.
The lot of time and chance is drawn by all,
And virtue's hope in heaven hath ever been;
Yet scarce even virtue from this earthly ball
Can every thought, and all affection wean,
Till age and death instil the final drop serene.

In the last voyage, to the last abode,
When pass the pure in heart from care and pain,
From sorrow and from sin, life's weary load,
To mingle hallelujahs with the strain
Of seer and patriarch in th' empyreal fane,
Even then they pause, and ere they mount on high,
One look to the forsaken body deign;
While disinthrall'd from every earthly tie,
Impassive to decay and never more to die,

New life commencing, they have thrown aside
The garment of mortality and woe:
And everlasting portals open wide
To welcome and imparadise them.
Lo!  Ascending and ascending up they go,
And leave the dwindling universe behind.
Man's universal debt in one brief throe
Was cancell'd; and their spirits are enshrin'd
In beatific vision of th' Eternal Mind.

Dazzled and overpowered, with eye and ear
Yet uninitiate, they at first behold
Obscurely, and with doubtful organ hear
Their title in the Book of Life enroll'd;
Till gradually the realms of bliss unfold,
And the third heaven be vocal to the train
Of seraphim that palm and crown of gold
Presenting, hail them to th' ethereal plains
In joy unutterable world without end to reign.

What radiance flashes on their opening eye!
What strains of transport fill their opening ear!
See the Celestial City blaze on high,
And ringing through the universal sphere
The shout of archangelic voices hear.
Thousands of thousands, number without bound,
Wake the triumphant song of heaven's own year,
And in mysterious harmony around
Ten thousand times ten thousand angel harps resound.

Before them in augmenting glory's beam
Th' unfathomable azure melts away;
While onward to the sanctuary supreme
Careering through th' infinitude of day,
They pour their souls into th' hierarchal lay
That circles evermore the mountain bright
Where sits whom saint nor angel can survey,
Too high, too glorious for created sight,
Throned unapproachable in mystery of light.
