ROGERS!  thy Mem'ry's Pleasures must be strong,
Or passing sweet thy subject is, and song;
I, humbler rhymester, strike a diff'rent string;
The Pleasures of Forgetfulness I sing.

To this all-quenching cause how many owe
The only relish of delight they know!
Our skilful authors honestly impart
The art of blotting as their highest art;
That large erasement, with amendment join'd,
Leave near perfection what is left behind.

The task indeed is hard, when we are led
To try it on a manuscript, or head;
But some have found, all blemishes detaching,
Their works and heads much comforted by scratching.
This Pascal knew, when to his Friend he wrote,
And at the bottom added in a note,
He hop'd his long epistle might find quarter,
Because he had not time to make it shorter.

Great wits, 'tis said, have memories most short;
Poor Garrick found it so, when call'd in Court:
He that could spout whole plays without a fault,
When speaking from himself, was forc'd to halt;
A question struck him dumb with strange dismay,
And Roscius had not one more word to say.

Thus Premier Pitt, who was no common dunce,
Forgot to know his own hand-writing once,
Left his old comrades to the law's sharp fang,
And kindly wish'd them by themselves to hang.

So Mem'ry Middleton acquir'd his fame
From evidence most halt, and blind, and lame;
Ask what they would, he always knew it not,
And his own acts ingeniously forgot.

So M&mdash;e timely found his scheming head
Void as his treas'ry, whence the cash had fled;
And honest T&mdash;r rummag'd his vast brain,
To trace the vagrant sums, but an in vain.

Good Sully, the best Minister of State,
To Gaul's best monarch, Henry, call'd the Great,
Relates a case in point, which chanc'd, he says,
In those disastrous times and cruel days,
When the proud Guises, and the restless league,
Were hatching plots, and nursing up intrigue;
When treason seem'd to lurk in many a breast,
And sad suspicion knew not where to rest.
'Twas then adjudg'd politically wise,
To fish from a Confessor the disguise,
As their dark purpose must by him be seen,
Whose absolution swept their bosoms clean;
For Popish saints their credit best maintain
By reck'nings short, to run in debt again.

The Father own'd it could but be a sin,
In such a case to keep the secrets in;
But being press'd on what he knew so well,
He try'd, but not one circumstance could tell;
Again he strove, but not a tittle came;
'Twas not his will &mdash; his mem'ry bore the blame.
Astonish'd at so marvellous a change,
"Father," they said, "the thing is wondrous strange,
That you, whose ready talents all allow,
Should be so awkwardly confounded now."

"Why, thus it is," said he, "by bounteous Heav'n,
To diff'rent men are diff'rent favours giv'n;
To some men wit, to others judgment strong,
Some men have patience, others mem'ry long;
Some Pleasure smiles on, others riches bless,
Mine is the grace of pure Forgetfulness:
For I no sooner a confession hear,
And with my blessing wipe a conscience clear,
Than kind forgetfulness blots ev'ry word,
And ev'ry deed away that I have heard."

'Twould be a blessing could some folks discern
A method their long learnings to unlearn;
Could we as quickly rectify a pate,
As schoolboys rub wrong reck'nings from a slate;
But heads are stubborn things that often hold
The trash of youth to plague themselves when old.

Poor Stultus, when a boy, was taught at school,
To think amiss, and go astray by rule;
Hence one strange bias led him all life long,
In perseverance obstinately wrong.
In vain  around him wisdom sheds its rays,
Blind superstitions harass all his days;
In vain each age grows wiser than the past,
Gross vulgar errors hold his spirit fast.

Ill-furnish'd mem'ry, like some mould'ring scroll,
Which antiquarian patience must unroll,
The Monkish hoard of legendary tales,
In old black letter penn'd, which never fails;
So closely written, that we find no breaks,
To add one sentence, or correct mistakes:
Retentive mem'ry thus its trash retains,
And not one space for mending it remains.

'Tis from Forgetfulness most people find
Unceasing entertainment for the mind:
Where heads less flimsy find amusement dull,
Because already they are stuff'd so full.

Slip reads a book, and, having read it through,
Its whole contents have vanish'd from his view;
He reads another, where with pilfering plain,
The same old tale is varnish'd up again;
Still he is pleas'd, still cannot why, recall,
For he has happily forgot it all:
Hence, though his gains are trifling and but few,
Yet ev'ry time he reads, the book is new.

Hold, on the other hand, by studious pains
Each book so comprehends, and then retains,
That his advantage from its use must rise,
The theme once read, no novelty supplies.
Then he, with recollection keenly nice,
Detects a plagiarism in a trice;
And relishes such hashes doubly book'd,
As Epicures would dainties doubly cook'd.
Thus mem'ries short find novelty prevail,
Where mem'ries long find subjects trite and stale.

Hence Parson Small-stock draws his chief content,
Who was to slumber more than study bent.
Three dozen sermons were his stock in trade,
Which Doctor Trussler sold him ready made;
These with new texts, and altering here and there,
He calls his tools, but little worse for wear,
And year by year, as just rotation led,
Each in its turn with gravity he read.
At length an intimate, who us'd to spend
A week in summer with his country friend,
Again with patience heard him mumble o'er
The sermon he had six times heard before;
Then frankly told him, he was much in doubt
This beaten track would tire his hearers out:
But Small-stock, smiling, made this quick retort&mdash;
"Thank God!  my hearers' memories are short."

How many a wight, grown in evasion bold,
Most deeply in his tradesmen's books enroll'd,
Would joyfully all past remembrance blot,
If creditors but handsomely forgot.

Shuffle can borrow, take on trust, or ask,
Eat ortolans, and crack his daily flask;
Dress, dance, and game, and squander like a Lord,
And rule with merriment the festive board.

Grave folks shake their dull heads, and wond'ring say&mdash;
"'Tis strange how he contrives his bills to pay."
That would be strange, but here the myst'ry lies,
The awkward bus'ness Shuffle never tries;
He from oblivion seeks, and finds repose
In sweet forgetfulness of all he owes;
Yet he can make a promise with good-will,
Nay, fix the day to pay his tailor's bill;
But then his mem'ry acts so strange a way,
That he can never recollect the day:
Nay, did not duns so oft his door beset,
He would the very name of Debt forget.

Sly Burly, manages the thing with skill,
He loses recollection &mdash; when he will:
Once he his kindred and his neighbours knew,
Who in the parish-school his comrades grew;
Then, when he toil'd in servitude obscure,
His memory was good, for he was poor:
But since by various schemes to wealth he rose,
There's not one soul of these good folks he knows.

Tim Trusty, fresh from home, rejoic'd to meet
His old companion strutting up the street:
"Bless me!" he cried, and would have held him fast,
"Why thee and I have met again at last!
How art thou? &mdash; What, not know me? &mdash; Why so shy?&mdash;
'Tis thine old friend, Tim Trusty &mdash; why 'tis I!"
Now Burly, knowing it was only Tim,
And that there nothing could be got by him,
Turn'd short away, and said, with scornful stare&mdash;
"You must mistake &mdash; I know not who you are."

This frees the smiling courtier's heart from pain,
Who cheats with promises an hungry train;
Year after year they on his levee wait,
Or daily worship at his Honour's gate;
There stand the scholar, and the hireling base&mdash;
Who claim a pension, or who need a place;
Who seek reward, or humbly ask their right,
Whose hearts are heavy, and whose pockets light.

The limbless Soldier, or the crippled Tar,
Poor shatter'd relics of successful war,
Grey vet'rans, long in thankless service tried,
Or sons, whose fathers for their country died!

Gracious in words, and bountiful in smiles,
Still flatt'ring hope his patient train beguiles;
Still one by one drop off, and others rise,
To live alike on smiles, and hopes, and lies.
How rests his Lordship 'midst these hopes betray'd?
How? &mdash; In forgetting all the vows he made.

Did but forgetfulness some people bless,
Their pow'r of doing mischief would be less;
Could they some precious stream Lethean find,
To wash away the rubbish of the mind;
Had they but leaky heads, or feeble lungs,
Could they but shut their ears, and rest their tongues;
Then might the tale of scandal harmless die,
Untold, unheard, a still-born infant lie.

For want of being deaf, Gossippa longs
To listen to her neighbours' faults and wrongs;
For want of wanting mem'ry, she retains,
And magnifies the subjects in her brains;
For want of being dumb, she cannot rest
Till all the story is to all confest;
Nay, secrets are such irksome things to hold,
She must tell all &mdash; and more than she was told.

Panic Tattle said, that last night Farmer Took
Had neatly lost his wife in Netly brook.
Jogging behind him on old Dobbin's crupper,
And fondly dreaming to reach home by supper,
Just in the middle Dobbin plung'd extreme,
And souse went Goody, sprawling down the stream;
There had she soon been lost, but Widow Shank
Seiz'd by her hair, and dragg'd her to the bank.

Gossippa heard this story, short and plain,
And, thus embellish'd, told it o'er again.
"Pray, Madam, have you heard the shocking strife
'Twixt Farmer Took and Dame, his lawful wife?
'Tween you and me, the thing is eas'ly guest&mdash;
I fear he likes the buxom widow best.
Well, crossing o'er the brook the other night.
He push'd his poor dear wife in, out of spite!
And, as I hear, the Widow Shank was nigh,
In hope to see our worthy neighbour die!
But Mistress Took, to drowning rather loath,
Crawl'd out the stream, to disappoint them both.
The Widow, vex'd to find her not yet dead,
In veng'ance snatched the hair from off her head.
Now, though Dame Took will sometimes scold and drink,
She ought not to he drowned yet &mdash; I think."

Could Memoratus but forget the past,
He might be more resign'd to breathe his last;
But cruel Memory unfolds a scroll
Of treasur'd deeds, that harrow up his soul.
From wayward youth to wretched age she flits,
Collects results, and hidden motives tries;
Picks from her chronicle of lapsed times
A catalogue of once forgotten crimes;
Bids conscience reckon up the dreadful score,
And tell of things he wish'd to hear no more.
'Twas this made Richard, in the tented field,
His daring soul to fancied terrors yield;
This marshall'd round his couch upbraiding ghosts,
And made the murd'rer tremble 'midst his hosts.
This, makes the Nabob, who has plunder'd long,
Rich from oppression &mdash; great from doing wrong;
But now retiring laden with rupees,
To live at home in dignity and ease&mdash;
This makes him shudder, when no foe is nigh,
And fancy keen contempt in ev'ry eye;
This wafts him oft from scenes where Pleasure reigns,
To India's distant desolated plains,
Where famish'd crowds, like fleshless spectres, spread,
And mould'ring bones still bleach their desert bed;
'Tis this corrodes his heart, and saps his health,
And makes him curse ambition, pow'r, and wealth.

Because Irascus cannot things forget,
He wastes his days in one continu'd fret;
Some friend's offence, some blunder undesign'd,
He hoards like fest'ring thorns, to wound his mind;
On these his thoughts, like foaming billows, roll,
Till madness and revenge inflame his soul.
No words can sooth, no time his wrath appease,
He loves his torments, fosters his disease,
And restless waits to strike some dreadful blow
Of stern retaliation on his foe.
Thus, ills imagin'd, long on mem'ry dwell,
And build within his breast a little bell.

Oh, happy he!  who disappointment feels
Like a dead weight for ever at his heels;
Who all day long is patient doom'd to hear
A pack of injuries, or load of care;
Who meets, without rebuffs to beat him down,
The friend's neglect, or the oppressor's frown!
Oh, happy he!  who can come home at night.
With conscience easy, and a mem'ry light;
Who feels within no recollections keen,
To interrupt retirement's tranquil scene;
Who, scorning rancour in his heart to keep,
Forgives, forgets, and goes in peace to sleep!
