PASTORA AND GALATEA.

Beneath the umbrageous shadow of a shade,
Where glowing foliage on the surface play'd,
And golden roses fann'd the silver breeze,
In many a maze light echoing through the trees,
Pastora tun'd the sweetly-panting string,
And ruddy notes thus wak'd the flattering spring;
While from th' alternate margin of an oak,
A woodland Naiad thus meandring spoke.

PASTORA.
The reed disports upon the sounding thorn,
And Philomel salutes the noon-tide morn,
The buzzing bees, poetic from their hive,
In smooth alliteration seem alive:
But ah!  my virgin swain is chaster far
Then Cupid's painted shafts, or sparrows are;
Sparrows that perch, like Sappho's, on my lay,
Or hop in concert with the dancing day.

GALATEA.
What sound was that, which dawn'd a bleating hue,
And blush'd a sigh?  Pastora, was it you?
Your notes, sweet maid, thus proverb still shall foil,
"The pot that's watch'd was never known to boil."

PASTORA.
Ah, no!  whate'er thou art, or sigh, or word,
Or golden water fam'd, or talking bird;
Source of my joy, or genius of my notes,
Or Ocean's landscape stampt with lyric boats,
Ah, no!  far hence thy aromatic strains
Recoil, and beautify our vaulted plains.

GALATEA.
Thy dazzling harmony affects me so,
In azure symmetry I sigh &mdash; ah, no!
Ah, no!  ah, no!  the woods irradiate sing,
Ah, no!  ah, no!  for joy the grottoes ring;
E'en Heraclitus' vocal tears would flow,
To hear thee murmur thy melodious No!
Thy voice, 'tis true, Pastora, gilds the sky,
But woods and grottoes flutter in my eye.

PASTORA.
When night pellucid warbles into day,
And morn sonorous floats upon the May,
With well-blown bugle through the wilds of air
I roam accordant, while the bounding hare
In covert claps her wings, to see me pass
Ethereal meadows of transparent grass.

GALATEA.
Magnetic thunders now illume the air,
And fragrant music variegates the year.
Light trips the dolphin through cerulean woods,
And spotless tygers harmonize the floods;
Ev'n Thetis smooths her brow, and laughs to see
Kind nature weep, in symphony with me.

PASTORA.
This young conundrum let me first propose,
It puzzles half our dainty belles and beaux.
What makes my lays, in blue-ey'd order shine
So far superior, when compar'd with thine?

GALATEA.
Expound me this, and I'll disclaim the prize,
Whose lustre blushes with Peruvian dyes.
When crowing foxes whistle in their dens,
Or radiant hornpipes dance to cocks and hens,
What makes sly Reynard and his cackling mate,
That sav'd the capitol, resign to fate?

PASTORA.
But see, Aquarius fills his ample vase,
And Taurus warbles to Vitruvian laws:
So, crab-like Cancer all her speed assumes,
And Virgo, still a maid, elastic blooms.
My rose-lipt ewes in mystic wonder stand
To hear me sing, and court my conscious hand.
Adieu, my goats; for ne'er shall rural muse
Your philosophic beards to stroke refuse.
