Where Erin ramparts out the western deep
With Kerry's mountain realm and rocky shore,
Dismay and solitude their vigil keep,
'Mid darkness, hurricane, and thunder's roar.
In vision round them throng the days of yore,
Departed saints and heroes they behold,
And shudder at traditionary lore,
By unimaginable heralds told,
Who deeds of other years and other worlds unfold.

Such the stern mood of thunder and of night,
Where Brandon Hill frowns awful on Tralee,
Or Kerry Head uprears his cloudy height,
And in defiance breasts the raging sea.
But atmospheres serene have charms for me,
And daylight sparkling on the Emerald Isle,
Where Nature in her bounty wantons free,
Till all Elysium springing at her smile,
O'er cliff, o'er mead, o'er dell the lengthened march beguile.

Awake, young pilgrim, mark, how paints the dawn
With varied hues Killarney's fairy reign,
Where castellated rock and abbeyed lawn,
And island groves adorn the liquid plain;
While margining the triple lake's domain,
Far as the southward gazer can descry,
Forests and towering steeps in far-drawn train
Mingle their vastness with the clouds on high,
Like steps by which the soul ascends into the sky.

What shade, what coolness, in the embowering wood,
Around Bellevue, beneath the templed brow
Of Aghadoe; where ages long hath stood
The round-tower's mystery.  Mark the ruddy glow
Of youth and age, in never ending flow,
That to the eventful contest wend their way,
Where fate, and judges of the field, must shew
If England or Hibernia win the day:
Sure prelude to carouse, to song, debate and fray.

They start, they fly, they come  &mdash; the course is done:
The chorus of wild triumph rides the air
In uproar:  the Milesian steed hath won;
And even the loser hath a heart to share
That universal joy; &mdash; but, O, beware
The witchery of the turf &mdash; the mirth it brings
Is harbinger to ruin and despair,
Bears off estate and fame on harpy wings,
And like all adder bites, and like a scorpion stings.

Escaped from such Charybdis, by the bridge
Of Scarvagh-Killin speed we to the stream
Of Lein, while gathering storms from Toomies' ridge
Roll downward (murky as the night-mare's dream)
With here and there a brief and doubtful gleam.
Even so unlooked-for sorrows oft deface
The morn of youth, and dim its orient beam;
For not on earth hath man his resting-place;
Where wanderers are we all, and all must run the race,

Through time and death's dominion, to the close
Of nature, when the trumpet calls to doom.
But much awry our speculation goes
If present need we miss:  the tempest's womb
Is bursting on the mountains, and the gloom
Dissolves in smoking deluges around,
That heaven and earth in one vast night entomb:
And cleft of rock, or cavern under ground,
Must be our shelter now, if shelter may he found.

Thus halting, look to where Macarthy More,
With arm unconquerable, upheld his reign,
And welcoming the battle's fierce uproar,
Stood like a lonely island of the main,
Whose adamantine boundaries disdain
The billow and the blast For never quailed
The heart of Erin; never shall a train
Of gallant sons he wanting, robed or mailed,
To grace her in repose, or guard her if assailed.

O, my loved Erin couldst thou brook the curl,
Of order and of law, how blest wert thou:
For then should no intestine broil disturb
Thy peace; nor vain repining cloud thy brow.
Theirs the reproach and guilt who better know,
Yet false alarums ring to party rage;
And bid thee with unhallowed ardour glow,
Sully with deeds of blood thine history's page,
And for imagined wrongs eternal warfare wage.

The sun returns; haste on, my friend; behold,
Where yawns Dunlow's abyss the crags between.
Well may the bosom heave, the blood run cold,
And the knee tremble.  'Mid this gulf hath been
The hand, the visitation of the Unseen,
In majesty of horror &mdash; list! &mdash; no sound;
Look up &mdash; no life, no vestiges of green.
Solitude, desolation all around,
And cloud-capt peaks that gird the unfathomable profound.

Yet terror call it not, but stern delight,
To gaze upon such chaos:  while the mind
Apart from her inthralling clay takes flight,
In adoration soaring unconfined.
What error theirs, to happiness how blind,
Who measure all by sense, reserve no room
Within the heart for thought of loftier kind,
But slumber in forgetfulness and gloom,
Till bursts upon their heads the thunder-peal of doom.

A wilderness like this, the Tishbite seer
Explored in Horeb, when Jehovah sent,
Before his mercy-seat, the dread career
Of whirlwind, that the rocks and mountains rent.
Then quivered earth, then blazed the firmament:
But wind, nor fire, nor earthquake was the shrine
That veiled the glory of the Omnipotent.
For, hark!  the still small voice, mysterious sign
Of God within the breast, and colloquy divine.

Genius of Contemplation!  not in scorn
Do we adventure, nor with breath profane,
To pour a soul into the mellow horn,
And wake the marvels of thy lonely reign.
A voice, we know not whence, repeats the strain;
A thousand tongues, invisible, reply
In mimic note again, and yet again;
Till faint in distance the sweet echoes die,
Like reascending choirs of angels to the sky.

They are but sounds; yet not in vain we lend
To sounds so worthy paradise an ear:
We catch their inspiration, and ascend
In fantasy's immeasurable career,
Beyond the lunar ball and starry sphere,
To where the cherubim and seraphim
Hold jubilee throughout the eternal year,
In choral ecstasies of praise to Him
Before whose sight the heaven and all their hosts are dim.

O might it be for ever thus! &mdash; too soon
The bond of sense corporeal checks our flight
And drags us down, to climb, in blaze of noon,
The vast abrupt of wonder and affright,
By lake, by stream, or buried under height
Of rocks that nod, impending to their fall.
Unmingled good is not for mortal wight:
Toil, pain, vicissitude, must come to all
Who on terrestrial orb, poor feeble emmets crawl.

And is there not a cause? &mdash; Think how began
The world's first pilgrimage of youth and joy,
When frailty-free arose imperial man,
God's image, heir of peace without alloy.
Alas!  that sin should enter, and annoy
The bliss of Eden, troubling the serene,
With hopes that cheat, and pleasures that destroy.
Sithence hard task for discipline hath been,
From transitory toys the unwilling soul to wean.

Clambering aloft, we bound we walk, we creep,
Mile after mile, from rocky stair to stair;
Till now advancing toward the topmost steep,
And elevate beyond the reach of care,
Heaven's vestibule we tread.  Yet signs there are
Even here of habitation:  smoke-wreaths blue,
Beneath yon rock denote some uncouth lair;
Perchance of one who wealth and grandeur knew,
Yet voluntary thence to holy rest withdrew.

Ah, no a sorceress here (so rumour tells)
Whose alchemies the bearded grain transmute,
In limbec and retort concocts the spells,
That travesty the human to the brute:
Yet such the gust of interdicted fruit,
That though her victims dwindle and wax pale,
Day after day, her threshold they salute,
To quaff her mountain-dew's insidious bale,
Whereof, who deeply drinks, the draught shall sorely wail.

For think not this the pearly moisture cool,
Ambrosial, dropping from the wheels of morn:
It is a wicked dew, that will befool
And send thee forth, of strength and reason shorn,
A dolt, an ape, the laughing-stock of scorn!
Be not enamoured of contempt and blame,
Pluck not the rose that bears so sharp a thorn;
Touch not &mdash; or if thou hast, thy grasp reclaim,
Nor thus for poison truck, health, competence and fame.

She comes &mdash; in semblance of a withered crone,
Goblet in hand.  "Tired stranger, drink," she cries;
"Unhappy he, who on himself alone,
"Oblivious of elixir's aid, relies:"
But heed her not; be temperate, and be wise;
Yet courteous in thy wisdom, lightly taste:
A sparing use exhilarates, fortifies,
And dancing in the veins, repairs the waste
Of stumble, stride, and leap, strained sinew, heat and haste.

At length, upon the summit ridge we stand,
Whence vision strains to search the depth below:
Before, behind us, and on either band,
Are valley, tarn and cliff &mdash; the torrent's flow&mdash;
And mountains over-arched with pluvial bow.
These are the temple:  here, to swell the song
Of Nature, thunders roar and tempests blow,
Till from mortality's self-blinded throng
The summoned spirit soar, and heaven-ward sail along.

"Good is it to be here;" the Apostle cried,
Who on the mount Messiah's glory saw:
And good it were that we too should abide
Sequestered thus, if in religious awe,
We could from guilt as from the world withdraw,
No duty shunned, no sacrifice unpaid
To social good, to Gospel, or to Law.
But flowers of amaranth spring not in the shade,
And Faith, Hope, Charity, are but a vain parade

In him, whose sour abstraction to the cell
Of malcontent misanthropy retires,
Forgetting and forgotten, there to dwell,
Cumbering the ground.  Far other thought inspires
High heaven, far other holocaust desires;
And the prime record of Redemption's plan
Gave oracle what service he requires:
For thus in Bethlehem fields the hymn began&mdash;
"Glory to God on high, good-will and peace to man!"

Descend we to the world again &mdash; a fall,
Precipitate; save here and there between,
A marshy ledge, besprent with rushes tall,
Gave change of peril.  Frequent might be seen
The myrtle of the bog, whose foliage green
Steams on the grasp a cloud of fragrance rare:
So virtue when opprest hath ever been
In sight of heaven, the more approved and fair;
A balsam beyond price, a pearl above compare.

Our boat was ready on the wild lake's shore,
Manned with a courteous and a gallant crew
Young Leary, skilful at the feathering oar,
And Darby Connor, trowsered spruce in blue;
The heart into the sinews Roberts threw,
And Tehan stoutly tugged the boat along,
Though on his forehead time some furrows drew.
Cheered with the bugle, repartee and song,
Together all they pulled, a lengthened stroke and strong.

Safely we steered with Fleming at the helm:
Foul shame it were, had Fleming past unsung,
The pride, the phoenix of Killarney's realm,
Cool, temperate, watchful; on whose lips, though young,
Authority, and mingled kindness, hung.
Connal our minstrel was, a peerless guide,
Though law's rough saddle once his withers wrung
For hasty speech: &mdash; can ever good betide,
When passion and poteen in reason's room preside?

What amplitude of mountains circling round,
How sleeps the lake beneath yon rocky wall!
Speak not; nor breathe &mdash; let no unhallowed sound
The consecrated solitude appal:
For what though every where and over all
Omnific presence rule, unheard, unseen?&mdash;
A sterner voice and a diviner call,
In crag and wilderness hath ever been;
Rebuking the gay stir of vanities terrene.

Condensed around the upland of the Boar,
The vapours blacken, and the winds pipe loud:
And shagged with storm, 'mid elemental roar,
The mountain, like a giant in his shroud,
Scowls through the veil of darkness and of cloud.
Poor mortal!  wilt thou dream of pomp and power&mdash;
Has glory charms?  are earth and ashes proud?
Look round thee, shrink from the wide-wasting shower;
And own thyself at most, the pageant of an hour.

Along the current, that meandering steals
Into the lake of Lein, we wound our way
Through grim defile, to where the eagle wheels
Round the rock-cradled mansion of his sway,
Or sun-ward culminates.  In elfin play
The many-throated echoes there repeat,
From east and west, from high and low, the lay;
Swell in advance, or languish in retreat:
Sweet beyond art, beyond imagination sweet.

But if a bold adventurer provoke
The paterero's thunderbolt of sound,
It flames &mdash; it blasts; &mdash; recoiling from the stroke,
Earth reels &mdash; the aerial ridge, the chasm profound,
Long peal of dread artillery rebound.
Turk calls on Mangerton; and o'er the height
Of Cromagloun the battle-roar flies round,
Recedes, returns, redoubles left and right,
And all things are confusion, uproar, and affright.

Scared by the deafening turbulence, we fled
The demons of the wild, with mop and moe,
And hideous hubbub, scoffing at our dread,
And hanging on our rear.  At length the foe,
Relenting into silence, let us go;
Nor dragged us backward to their goblin den,
In that deep world of wonder and of woe;
Where once immured in cavern or in fen,
We never more had known sun, moon, or face of men.

Beneath the bridge, and by the pleasant coast
Of Dinas isle, the rapids bore us down;
The while our navigators made their boast
Of Boatman's-Hall, and fair Killarney town;
And how, amid the pendent groves that crown
Turk's northern side, the giants dwelt of old;
And how strange misadventure foiled the clown,
Who rashly dived to that subaqueous hold,
Where snarls the spectre hound to guard the crocks of gold.

But now, without dimension, without form,
A dark confusion overspread the day;
Conglomeration huge of cloud and storm,
That on us pounced, like leopard on his prey,
And like a debtor dunned we scoured away.
Yet, sudden though the flurry, fierce its power,
The timely refuge of a sheltered bay
Glena bestowed; where in umbrageous bower
Securely we contemned the pelting of the shower.

Looking to where Lough Lein's thick-clustering isles
In labyrinth of loveliness are spread,
We little dreamed of fortune's wanton wiles,
Or diadem impending o'er our head.
Such the career of life so are we led,
Unknowing wherefore, when, or whither bound,
On what new errand, what new clime to tread.
In truth and virtue certainty is found;
All mention of it else were but an empty sound.

Among our company was one, whose name
Maternal marked him of a lineage rare,
Erst in Ierna, of toparchal fame,
Whose antique appellation to declare
Orthography and verse at variance are;
Though once (unless tradition fable be)
They conquered from Killarney to Kenmare:
Whence vests in him, from that high pedigree,
Of six-and-thirty isles, the principality.

But what avail us arable or down,
Till on them drop the fatness of the shower
Or toil and talent, till occasion crown
Their energies, and fortune grant the dower?
The ascendant must be waited, and the hour,
Ere astrolabe detect the favouring sign;
And even of genealogy and power,
What deem we, till their bounties warm and shine?
Mere pearls within the shell, mere diamonds in the mine!

Such thought revolving, thus the prince began.
Strangers of England whose far-searching mind
Hath sent you to survey the modes of man,
What passions prompt him, and what sanctions bind
In these rude wilds &mdash; reception shall ye find,
Such as the wanderer and the guest may crave:
For we avouch, and ever have opined,
That honour is the birth-right of the brave,
And gifts distinguish best the sovereign from the slave!

Ye both are welcome, and ye both employ
Alike our care:  yet let not age think blame,
If youth (for youth has longer to enjoy)
Be chosen to taste our bounty, and proclaim
To the four winds our hospitable fame.
An isle of yonder archipelago
His sceptre shall receive, and bear his name:
That we and all our ancestors may show
How well to win allies, and grace desert we know.

He added not:  and as his words had end,
The brightening aether gave auspicious sign;
And the young chief-elect prepared to bend
His cares on royalty, and how to shine
The founder of a long imperial line.
Straight we embarked; while the subsiding breeze,
The emerging sun, the temperature benign,
Foreboded quiet rule, unbroken ease;
Invaders none without, within no rapparees.

The destined appanage (like modest worth)
Was little known; untilled as yet and bare,
Save where the red-stemmed arbutus hung forth,
Fruitage and flower at once, adorning fair
Each limestone crevice.  How shall art compare
Her fading hues to that perennial green!
As well might vice and ignorance hope to share
With wisdom in the happiness serene,
That converse holds in heaven, and looks to things unseen.

Anon we landed; and the unconscious isle
Received its future lord, and took his name
With ceremonial given and mingled stile
Of Erse and Latian tongue, as well became
Killarney's lettered sept, and classic fame.
Then was libation made:  and three times three,
The cheers of loyalty and loud acclame,
Taught lake and mountain to repeat with glee,
Prosperity and peace to that new dynasty!

The investiture, in record duly penned,
That night the donor's coronal must grace;
And each a twig of arbutus must bend,
And on his brow the verdant chaplet place,
In reverence and memorial.  Erin's race
With fanciful fond pastime thus recal,
Of domination past each fleeting trace,
That in secluded walk, or crowded hall,
May soothe their solitude, or glad their carnival.

A lofty race they are, of kindred soul
To the hot sun; yet listening in delight,
And homage, to persuasion's mild control:
But he who thwarts them, or invades their right,
Had better beard a lion in his might.
Strong as the bison, agile as the roe,
Prompt in the gibe, and prompter in the fight;
To benefit a friend, or quell a foe,
Through pain, toil, peril, fire, and water will they go.

The day declines:  a lengthening dusk is thrown
Along the lake, on castle, rock, and glade,
Saddening the hue of Rabbit Island brown,
And Inisfallen's wilderness of shade;
And where the truant imp, the frolic blade,
Whom 'Paddy Blake' the men of Kerry call,
Lurks by the tower of Ross in ambuscade,
Mocks instrument of speech, song, laughter, brawl,
Gives audience day and night, and challenges from all

Accepts; and, after grave deliberate pause,
Each inarticulate or articulate sound
Rehearses, note by note, or clause by clause;
And laughs to hear philosophy profound
The causes of his merriment expound.
Yet is he but an atom of the chain,
In which the circling elements are bound
By Him whose fiat framed, whose hands sustain
Earth and the firmament, and multitudinous main.

Our voyage done, awhile upon the strand
In meditation mark we the serene
Of soft religious twilight, mantling land
And water, the gray cliff, the forest green,
In melancholy and gloom, till all between
Be mingled with the horizon towering high,
Save (where the lake's dark windings intervene)
In rude inverted grandeur we espy
The solemn mountain-wall reflected to the sky.

Meantime, in majesty from pole to pole
Progressing, the magnificence of night
Illumines one by one, and bids to roll
From orient to the west, the infinite
Of stellar fires.  So, when all earth's delight
Is darkened and withdrawn, Faith lends her wing,
New worlds, new paradises bless the sight,
And angel hierarchies are heard to sing,
Where lamps in emblem burn before the Eternal King.

Nor angels only; every orb a voice
Re-echoes:  ocean, air, and the dry ground,
The sun and moon, the day and night rejoice;
Wind, storm, and time, and seasons in their round
Fulfil his bidding, and his praise resound.
And if, beneath the shadow of death, where pine
Sorrow and sin, if thus, even there, be found
A glimpse, an image of the bliss divine;
If through mortality's thick cloud such radiance shine.

What then shall be the glory when the alloy
Of sense and appetite, of guilt and fear,
At once dissolving into life and joy,
Lets in the vision of the empyreal sphere,
The blaze of heaven's irrevoluble year?
Such on the banks of Jordan was the flight
Of fiery steeds and chariot, the career
Of whirlwind bearing from Elisha's sight
His master, to the throne of inexpressive light.

Perchance we murmur at our scanty dole
Of knowledge, and would foreign climes explore;
Invade the frozen desert of the pole,
Or breath the fragrance of Arabia's shore;
Or search the sculptured mountains of Ellore;
On Himalaya tempt the secret hall
Of Typhon, and the death-winged thunder's roar,
With summer fly round this terraqueous hall,
And keep each month alike the sun's bright festival.

But nobler were it, from Jove's moons to view
His huge circumference filling all the sky,
The darkling flight of Uranus pursue,
And if above such height ascending high,
Some exiled planet undiscovered lie,
On that strange watch-tower to sit specular,
Or on the comet ride infinity,
And wandering o'er creation, see from far
The glorious orb of day diminished to a star.

Even this were little &mdash; to the just is given
A loftier range, a kingdom more sublime;
The inviolable sanctuary of heaven,
Where never doubt, nor ignorance, nor crime,
Where never sorrow or dismay can climb.
Transfigured into light, they leave below
The narrow boundaries of space and time,
And up the everlasting mountains go,
Where bliss unutterable, nor pause, nor end shall know.
