O thou West Wind!  thou breath of life decaying
Slowly and mournfully o'er yon red sky:
Where the far Day, her steep course still delaying,
Sinks in the bosom of eternity:
Her hues of beauty fade, her cheek is cold,
And light and warmth are gone, and yon pale star
Watcheth her rest, and Darkness like a fold
Mantles around her, and first heard afar&mdash;
Then nearer o'er the waters hushed and dim
Thou raisest o'er her couch thy gentlest requiem hymn!

Hear me, even now, thou Spirit of the Air!
Thou viewless thing, that as a Presence dust give
Life and elastic gladness &mdash; Oh, that I were
Like thee, a bodiless essence, and could live
All freshness and all purity and leave
The passions that do waste this clay behind,
Sorrow, and pain, and hopelessness; and grieve
No more for ought of earth, but like thee, Wind,
Revel before the path of that bright sun,
And pass away at last like melody when done.

Child of the elements!  who so blest as thou?
When the rich twilight fades along the skies
Steeping in hues of heaven the earth's wan brow,
Thou wanderest from the gates of Paradise.
The flowers give thee their perfume, from above
The dews sink on thy wings, and thou goest on
Hallowing each spot thou visitest, while Love
Breathes to thee, bowered in his deep haunt alone,
A blessing when thou com'st, a sigh when thou art gone.

I hear thee now &mdash; the scattered leaves are sighing
To thy sweet breath they never more shall feel!
From the seared woods a voice is heard replying,
Where the last lingering tints of Autumn steal:
All breathe decay and sadness, they are dead,
And hope with them lies buried &mdash; unlike thee,
Who, while man's mightiest works as leaves are fled,
Still wanderest o'er the bright earth wild and free,
Like Love, the awakening soul, that liveth on eternally.

Requiem of Melody chaunted as from heaven,
Which through great Nature's temple swells along!
Now, while life rests in holiest commune given,
I sit arid listen thy inwoven song;
What dost thou teach me?  nothing can be known;
Then let me dream awhile from thought oppressed,
Lulled by the murmurs of thy dreamy tone:
Enough that in this bright day I am blest,
That I, like thee at last, shall find my place of rest.
