Fair are the scenes that Nature's empire yields,
The stores that all her happy haunts adorn,
The vernal breeze of fragrance in her fields,
The smile of evening, and the blush of morn:

Fair are life's placid cares, its social hours,
Its fond endearments, and its mild repose:
The peace of pure affection's nuptial bowers,
And all the joys domestic comfort knows.

Fair are the beams of friendship's brightening eye,
Sweet modesty, and ignorance of art,
The soul enlarged with warm philanthropy,
And beauty's bloom, and youth's ingenuous heart.

Yes, they are fair, and fraught with large delight,
Yes, they are themes my serious soul admires;
May Time's rude hand ne'er sweep them from my sight,
Nor quench the zeal of virtue's young desires!

Reflection comes, with Truth's impartial frown,
And all the visionary scene destroys,
Tears the bright gems from Fancy's glittering crown,
And mars the prospect of our promised joys.

In vain the Muse hath built her fairy plan,
Severe Philosophy contracts her brow,
The illusion mocks, and tells unthinking man,
How vain the hope of happiness below.

But though nor calm Reflection's form appear,
Nor sage Philosophy her lore impart,
Yet deep Experience (rugged nurse!) is near
To stamp her lesson on the bleeding heart.

Behold how soon the transient scenes recede,
How soon rich Autumn's golden gleams decay!
Cold Winter desolates the pictured mead,
And all the bright creation fades away!

But ah!  that each sweet passion should expire,
The luxury of tender thought be o'er!
Lost the soft thrill of innocent desire!
And love, and youth, and beauty be no more!

Their fleeting influence no new morn recals,
By Death, night-fettered in his iron cave,
No Spring restores, but ruthless Fate enthrals,
Deep in the eternal winter of the grave.

Oft as the tombs I traced with silent dread,
That lie forlorn, and even without a name,
And here may sleep some virtuous heir, I said,
Though ne'er recorded by the voice of Fame.

Some Howard here may sleep, whose pitying breast
At wants and woes he could not heal, repined;
In his pale shroud some Hanway here may rest,
Unblest with power to benefit mankind.

See, where in dust the orphans late have laid
Their parent's couch, their parent now no more!
Here the wan bride, in widow-weeds arrayed,
With deepest anguish her lost lord deplore!

Ah see how low the son of genius lies,
Resigns in sad obscurity his breath,
In the fair dawn of fancy doomed to feel
The cruel, cold, arresting hand of death!

Unknown to fame, (but fame he ne'er desired,)
Far from the vale where his young steps had roved:
No pitying look from her his soul admired;
No strain of solace from the muse he loved.

But hark!  what sounds burst on the imperfect strain?
The bell's slow, plaintive, melancholy breath
Pours its big voice along the listening plain,
And pealing sounds the solemn knell of death.

Thee too, Aurelia, thee Death's clay-cold hand
Leads young and beauteous to his dreary bower,
For thee the groves their sacred glooms expand,
Breathe on thy bloom, and blight thy opening flower.

While yon pale maid, with sorrow-streaming eyes,
With tears that warm from wounded friendship flow,
Kneels on the turf, and, O blest shape!  she cries,
And bursts into an extasy of woe.

Soft Sympathy beholds, and on the scene,
Life's mournful picture, sheds the pitying tear;
Sore troublous thoughts, mean while with anguish keen,
Seize the sad soul of comfortless despair.

Yet Oh, revive!  behold with milder gleam
Hope's joyful day-spring in the East arise;
To cheer our path, till joy's immortal beam,
Descend in full effulgence from the skies!

Beyond the joys of life, beyond the tomb,
Exalt the soul to endless joys above,
Where Virtue dwells, with Beauty's heavenly bloom,
Unfading youth, and everlasting love.

How poor, how sunk will then these worlds appear!
Then when yon dazzled orb shall fail to shine,
When Nature's voice no more shall charm the ear,
Lost in the spheres of harmony divine.

Reflection pains no more the musing mind,
Sad Elegy no more awakes the sigh:
Fain would I leave these transient scenes behind,
And lift a strain of triumph to the sky.
