Where stood the bard of old in the high hour
When the Muse filled him with her magic power?
Not in the hall where revelry and mirth
Draws the wrapt soul from thoughts of loftier birth;
Not in the bower where notes subdued and clear
Be such as win on listening Beauty's ear:
Not in the haunts where mingled among men
The spirit is lowered to common life again.
His step was on the mountain heath when clouds
Veiled their grey peaks in fluctuating shrouds:
Where the wild cataract brawls along the steep,
And the scathed birch trees bend around and weep:
And the lone ruin frowns above the flood
Black with the horror of impending wood:
Where Freedom sits upon her throne sublime,
Her altars hallowed from the birth of Time!
Then &mdash; while the mossy cairn was on his eye,
Rough with the stain of battle-fields gone by:
When the low wind was wailing far and shrill,
And the grey mist rolled floating round the hill:
And the long grass upon the rocky heath
Sighed like the Voices of the Dead beneath!
Then, while each impulse waked the rising flame,
The Celtic Muse, the inspiration came!
She came &mdash; and lighted up his aged eye
With the decaying flame of ecstacy!
And his veins thrilled again with sacred fire,
And his hand swept along the sounding lyre:
While o'er his tranced sight was darkly shed
The long lost shadows of the mighty dead,
While their high memory and deathless fame
Lived in his heart and kindled through his frame:
And the disdain of life, and conscious pride
Of spirit by kindred commune deified!

O marvel not his voice was lofty &mdash; heard
Burst o'er the stillness of the breathless board:
That grey-haired heroes felt returning pride,
That the young burned to pour their heart's full tide,
So they might claim when mingled with the brave,
The life &mdash; the immortality he gave!
Where art thou now?  the halls that echoed high
With the applause of thy wild minstrelsy,
The very stones that moulded them are gone:
The warriors past like meteors that have shone.
Their fame was left to thee, and left in vain,
For oh, how brief was thy own life and strain!
The age when thou didst flourish &mdash; sunk within
The abyss of Time as if it had never been!
Such shall be ours:  but oh, how blest wert thou
In the Bard's name more hallowed far than now;
The aged gathered round thy steps and blest
The harp that soothed and sanctified their rest!
The ear of Beauty listened, and the young
On thy high words as on a prophet hung.
Wherefore?  they heard the strains of Liberty,
That taught them how to live, or greatly die:
That breathed the softer virtues, which, apart
Dwelt on, were fixed and hallowed in the heart;
Our colder, lowlier, meaner themes are won
From toil and art &mdash; but thou wert Nature's son!
