My friend! &mdash; forgive me! &mdash; 'twas my love alone
Which urged my transport in this uncouth verse,
Sighed out the ill-chose syllables in tone,
And bade me thus my wretchedness rehearse.

Surely I've felt each different form of woe,
And, in each mode, have borne affliction's pangs!
In every varied shape the Proteus know,
In every form have felt her direst fangs!

Oh!  AMARANTHA! &mdash; not to meet again!&mdash;
At once forget each sympathizing glow&mdash;
Alas! &mdash; thou hearest me not &mdash; my cries are vain!
In vain my sighs!  my wretchedness!  my woe!&mdash;

But, yet, Oh!  purest soul; &mdash; yet, e'er thour't fled,
One emanation to my spirit dart;
One small, small portion of thy virtue shed,
That I may feel thy semblance on my heart.

Where thou residest my spirit longs to go,
And my soul fain would dwell with thee above!
My heart, bent down with solitude and woe,
Desires, with thee, to taste a SAVIOUR'S love!

How have we lived!  how loved!  ah!  must we part!
Oh could yon ardent Seraph drop his plumes!
The heavenly prize should straightway wing my heart,
To pierce with thee the star-bespangled domes!

What holy themes have erst employed that tongue!
What godly thoughts that more than human mind!
Praise borne on that in heaven-dissolving song,
From this a prayer wafted on every wind.

Ah!  go not yet!  must AMARANTHA leave
The dearest object of her earliest love?
Must she descent, so blooming, to the grave?
So early join her kindred saints above?

How pleasant e'en in death! &mdash; that sinking eye
Which never looked on vice &mdash; that purest breast
Which virtue only taught to heave a sigh,
Has pointed long for its eternal rest!

See, with what prayers she darts her soul to heaven,
(Collect the dying accents as they fall)
"Oh God &mdash; Redeemer!  be my sins forgiven!
To thee I come &mdash; my love!  my hope!  my all!"

Oh, can I e'er forget the lovely maid!
When stretched upon the bed of girding pain;
While, with her arm around my neck, she said,
"Farewell, beloved!  'till we meet again!

"'Till we exalt our unexampled love
Into one fountain of eternal praise;
'Till we unite our every power above,
To sing our JESUS in unceasing lays!"

Hark! &mdash; from yon time-worn, mossy spire, I hear
The dismal knell of AMARANTHA'S coarse:
Lo!  'twixt the trees I see the slow borne bier&mdash;
Each nodding plume her virtuous worth deplores.

The pale-faced orbit of the moon displays
A pleasing horror o'er yon low-shorn green,
And gives her borrowed  feeble-chearing rays
To aid the solemn sadness of the scene.

The long-drawn isle &mdash; and sorrow-cloathed tomb&mdash;
The ragged trophy &mdash; and the marbled bust&mdash;
The smoaky tapers adding to the gloom,
Along the heaps of monumental dust.&mdash;

The dying echoes, sounding through the height,
Feebly protract the dirge's doleful strain
The dismal howlings of the bird of night,
And the slow pacing of the sable train.

How all-uncertain is the hope of bliss!
The thought of future happiness how vain!
The worlds beyond the grave (alas!  not this)
May dwell in joy, without a sense of pain!

Hope held to view a round of circling years,
Array'd in bliss, and glittering with delight,
Shewed me a balm for worlds of vexing cares,
To still each woe, and make each sorrow light!

My soul at ease, as if of bliss secure,
As if possessing to its farthest went,
Looked on encreasing happiness as sure,
Fraught with a wish for more than heaven could grant.

Then didst thou strike! &mdash; Oh GOD!  thy will be done!
Thy dispensations cannot but be right,
However feebly by weak wretches known,
Howe'er imperfect in our darkened sight!

Resigned I'll bear the ruthless hand of woe,
Resigned bereft of AMARANTHA'S love,
May but my sorrows terminate below,
And JESU'S mercies crown my soul above!

And now, Oh!  fairest of thy sex, farewel;
Thou summit of my earliest hope!  adieu!
One tear must fall, one pang the sorrow tell,
Of me bereft of happiness and you!

Is AMARANTHA hurried on her bier?
Who can restrain the tribute of a sigh?
Who can call back the sorrow-shrouded tear,
Or stop the gushing torrent of the eye?

EPITAPH.
Traveller!  seek not the goodness of the fair,
Upon the surface of unfeeling stone&mdash;
Ask of the honest heart &mdash; 'tis graven there&mdash;
Perhaps you'll find it written on your own.

Ask of the poor, along the village street;
Ask of the sick, within the impoverished cot;
Ask every weeping object, which you meet,
If her benevolence can be forgot?
