'Tis eve!  'tis falling eve!  how chang'd the scene,
Ting'd with the soft hues of the glowing west!
Dim hills afar, and happy vales between,
With the tall corn's deep furrow calmly blest!
More near &mdash; the sea by Eve's mild gale caress'd,
And groves of living green that fringe its tide;
White sails, that gleam on Ocean's bounding breast
And the light fisher-barks that homeward glide,
To seek Clovelly's shores of beauty and of pride!

And hark!  the mingling sounds of Earth and Sea!
The pastoral music of the bleating flock,
Blent with the sea-bird's uncouth melody;
The wave's deep murmur to th' unheading rock;
And ever and anon th' impatient shock
Of some rude billow on the echoing shore!
And hark!  the rower's deep and well-known stroke&mdash;
Glad hearts are there, and joyous hands, once more
Weary the whitening wave with their returning oar!

But turn where Art with graceful hand hath twin'd
The living wreath for Nature's placid brow;
Where the glad wanderer's joyous footsteps wind
Mid rock, and glancing stream, and waving bough,&mdash;
Where scarce the valley's leafy depths allow
The lingering sunbeam in their shade to dwell&mdash;
There might the naiad breathe her softest vow,
Or the grim Triton sound his wreathed shell,
Lur'd from their azure home by scenes they love so well!

A softer beauty floats along the sky,
And moonlight dwells upon the heaving wave&mdash;
Far off the night-winds fade away and die,
Or, murmuring, slumber in their ocean cave;
Tall oaks, whose limbs the giant-storm might brave,
Bend in rude fondness o'er the silvery sea;
Nor can the mountain-ash forbear to lave
Her blushing clusters, where the waters free
Murmur around her feet such soothing melody!

Lovely Clovelly!  in thy shades of rest,&mdash;
When timid Spring her pleasant task hath sped,
Or Summer pours from her redundant breast,
Her fruits and flowers along the vale's deep bed;
But most when Autumn's golden glories spread,
And half forgot rude Winter's withering rage,
What fairer path could woo the wanderer's tread?
Soothe wearied Hope, or worn Regret assuage?
Lo!  for firm Youth a bower!  a home for lapsing Age!
