E'er her bright robe the lucid day had spread,
Or cluster'd glories wrapt her GOLDEN head;
Two Swains impervious sought the plumag'd vale,
Whose flaccid sighs soft swell'd the rosy gale;
For purple love their wreathed hearts possest,
And Lubin thus his peccant friend addrest.

LUBIN.
Lo!  DAMON now the tresses of the morn
Wave round the soul, and shield the breezy thorn;
The MYSTIC HOURS unbar the fainting night,
Extatic nature mellows as she flings,
O'er the young scene her evanescent wings.
Here, where no revels mitigate the glade,
But ills obumbrate the low-breathing mead;
Now with our pipes let us in sameness prove,
Who best can reel the VIVID CLASP of love.

DAMON.
O!  LUBIN, thou whose lambent soul can feel,
The painted griefs which mantling notes reveal;
Thy sounding wishes glad my prurient mind,
To thy blue aims, and downy traits inclin'd;
But yet, methinks the hours would glide along,
In ROSIER PACE didst thou with burnish'd song,
Thy FLORA chaunt &mdash; while I in furtive lays,
Wou'd tell the greensward coral PHOEBE'S praise.

LUBIN.
Pant, O!  my lute, precarious vigils sing,
With FLORA'S charms, I'll shake the lurid string.
She's fair as Elfins on bright IDA'S head,
When twilight shadows lift the falling dead;
She's sweeter far than eyelids of the morn,
Whose dewy orbs the festive oaks adorn,
Collective beauty emulates her face,
And blighted variance yields her gelid grace.

DAMON.
In silver accents let my pipe proclaim
My PHOEBE'S charms, and bind the purple theme:
Sweet glar'd the hours, when up the vagrant steep,
I've met my fair one with her transient sheep;
Her orient charms in calmer accents flow'd,
The mountains glimmer'd and the vallies glow'd;
'Tis there irriguous she did speak of love,
The louring glade, and paley crested dove.
Fair screams my soul, while frigidly I burn
Through the round vista of a faded urn!
While all the UTTER'D GLANCES of her eye,
Ring round the wild and numb the lifting sigh.

LUBIN.
Thy PHOEBE'S eye, laconic, can't compare
With the bland tumults of my FLORA'S air;
AUSONIAN streams may wayward tints disclose,
And down Seraphic wrap the yielding rose.
But these summ'd up could ne'er irriguous vie
With the dark lustre of my FLORA'S eye.
Remembrance oft her yellow hand shall rear,
Trace each soft wish, and cull each rigid care.
When first my Flora burst upon my sight,
Like golden visions girding fated night,
Obstreperous beauties from her lip I tore,
And joys sequester'd to her wailings bore.
E'er evening's breath shall shroud the amber grove,
Or shepherd lads to PLASTIC MEASURES move,
Her shall I greet &mdash; then let my pipe proclaim,
My PHOEBE'S charms, and bind the purple theme.

DAMON.
How oft empyreal have I toiling strove,
To veil the gambols of the maid I love!
Not milk preposterous from AURORA'S wing,
Not shapes IAMBIC, which WHITE poets sing,
VALCLUSA'S vales, AETOLIA'S brazen groves,
Ne'er held such citings to the azure loves,
Or are so porous as my FLORA'S mind,
Whom lost I sought, and seeking strove to find.
Pant O my lute precarious vigils sing
To HOIA'S charms I'll shake the lurid string.

LUBIN.
My Phoebe's fairer than the radiant trees,
When previous thunder shakes the wayward breeze;
Her grace effulgence.

DAMON.
Hush thy pallid strain
For lo!  the Maidens tread the latent plain;
Close by yon copse they take their frantic stand,
In soft production laughing hand in hand.

LUBIN.
True &mdash; then  collusive let the mossy lay
Lie in pale musing till some future day,
And let us join the insulated pair,
And each one wily greet his dimpling fair.
