While sallow autumn tinges all the groves,
The dark leaf fading to a yellower green,
Beside yon dimpled pool,
Which sportive swallows skim,
In airy rings, sequester'd let me rove;
And, in delicious indolence, devote,
Glean'd from the busy week,
One moment to the muse.

O had I, COLLINS, thy melodious reed,
Whose "Pastoral Touch," beneath the blooming thorn,
Sooth'd the chaste ear of Eve,
And match'd "her dying gales!"
Sweetest of songsters!  While yon setting sun
Shall streak the skies with crimson, grateful Eve
With tears of freshest dew
Shall bathe thy early grave!

The hills no longer ring with social glee,
The virgin's modest titter, the broad laugh
That shook the bumpkin's sides,
And tir'd the Echoes round:
Far as the eye can stretch, the sickle's toil
Has clear'd the glebe, save where, dispers'd and dark,
Some lingering beans are left,
Dry rustling in the breeze.

How lovely smiles the landscape!  not a sound
Swells in the gale, save where yon jovial swains,
The plenteous harvest hous'd,
Shout o'er their festal ale:
Save where, in yonder stubble fields, the youth
Whistles his ready spaniel, and anon
Erects the fatal tube,
That thunders through the sky.

The sun no longer flames with downward ray,
Nor hides so oft as when young APRIL gloom'd,
Behind some fleecy cloud
His shy precarious beams.
Nor too obtrusive, nor yet too retir'd,
(Emblem of princes good as well as great!)
The bright-hair'd monarch sheds
His gentle, genial beam.

Can full-blown summer, or fair-opening spring,
Her budding roses, and her lucid show'rs,
(Like tears of prattling babes,
That glisten and are gone,)
Can they compare with this heart-soothing calm,
This sweet autumnal sadness, that prepares,
With gentlest change, the mind
For winter's awful reign?

Ah me!  how few and fading are our joys!
Ev'n while we speak the transient bliss expires.
Methinks ev'n now the gale
That fans yon trembling trees
Begins to murmur louder, and announce
Grim winter near, in all his storms array'd,
To strip the with'ring grove,
And desolate the plain.

The mind still varies with the varying year;
Laughs with the joyous spring; in summer faint,
Beneath the sultry noon:
Assumes in autumn a more sober tone,
A noble stillness; and in winter frowns,
Chearless as blasted heaths,
And gloomy as the skies.

Ere then the turbid days arrive, when clouds
Shall snatch yon azure canopy from view,
When driving rains shall beat,
And flaky snows descend,
Be mine, inspiring autumn, still to watch
Thy latest gleams, and, bath'd in orient dews,
With PERSIAN homage hail
Thy rosy-finger'd morn!
