The sable evening hovers o'er the west,
And chides delay from dissipation's shrine;
The various slaves of toil and traffic rest,
While meditation prompts the moral line.

Now rise the sons of pleasure, listless train!
And every thought disowns reflection's power;
Save where misfortune binds the cruel chain,
And sorrows greet the melancholy hour.

Save where on yon' deserted pavements creep
The suff'rers &mdash; lost to all but pity's claim;
Doom'd in a war of elements to sleep;
Or brood on anguish, penury, and shame.

Beneath that conscious pile's polluted range,
Where proud piazzas deck the stately line,
Each to the modest call of virtue strange,
The orphan suppliants in contrition pine.

The keen reproach, &mdash; the energy of prayer&mdash;
The frantic bosom, and the languid head&mdash;
The solemn curses of unsooth'd despair,
No more shall raise them from their mournful bed.

For them no more the flatt'ring knee shall bend,
Or fawning transports mask the treacherous guest;
The names of mother, sister, wife, and friend,
Stand lasting aliens from their guilty breast.

How did they once, indignant, start away,
To loath th' enticing look &mdash; the rude reply;
How did they triumph, innocently gay&mdash;
While truth exulted in their modest eye.

Let not contempt infuse their cup of woe
With bitter sneer &mdash; and still their wrongs oppress;
Nor rude reproach in scorpion accents flow,
And speak new tortures to their deep distress.

The pride of beauty yields to passions call;
One heedless moment may to shame entice;
E'en cold philosophy may meet its fall,
And totter down the precipice of vice.

Nor you, ye vain, to these impute the crime
If no fair annals grace their blasted name;
If rudely cropt and with'ring in their prime,
They blush'd obedience to a lawless flame.

Perhaps beneath yon' shatter'd roof is laid
Some breast once faithful, spotless, chaste, and good;
Hands which LUCRETIA'S poniard might have sway'd,
And curst the tyrant with a martyr's blood.

But soft persuasion first beguil'd their youth,
Nor education quench'd the am'rous fire;
Won from the paths of innocence and truth,
They plung'd &mdash; sad victims!  in unblest desire.

Full many a female of superior soul
Strays through the regions of unhallow'd night;
Full many a virtue shame and grief controul,
Veil'd by misfortune from the vulgar sight.

Some fallen RUTLAND may our tears command,
Now doom'd in darkness and distress to tread,
Some sad neglected DEVONSHIRE may stand,
Some CHARLOTTE, worthy of a monarch's bed!

To shun temptation's fascinating voice,
With ripen'd knowledge and mistrust of guile,
By guardian judgment to direct their choice,
And read instruction in a parent's smile,

Their lot forbad; &mdash;their humble lot, perchance,
Had circumscrib'd the foul adult'rous train;
Withheld fair ***** from the bold advance,
Nor planted torments in a husband's brain.

Far from a city's madding crowd retir'd,
From pride, and all the busy scenes of care;
No turbid thoughts their gentle bosoms fir'd,
No fears foreboded the deceitful snare.

Still their conflicting sorrows to compose,
Some fond memorial shall compassion rear,
Mercy behold their drooping eyelids close,
And pay the passing tribute of a tear.

Their youthful frailties, and their plaintive fate,
Shall mark the nameless mansions of their dust;
The voice of wisdom shall their woes relate,
And warn th' unwary virgins how they trust.

For who, to reason and reflection lost,
The call of sad example can despise;
Disdain protection to their virgin boast,
Nor study from misfortune to be wise?

In solemn warnings from the paths of shame
The falt'ring accents of the wretched cease;
E'en from the grave of their injuries exclaim,
And point to virtue, modesty, and peace.

For if &mdash; when death hath seal'd their ling'ring doom,
And o'er some victim cast an awful veil;
Led by compassion to the silent tomb&mdash;
Each sad, fond mourner should inquire her tale;

Haply some kindred wanderer may say,
"Oft have I seen her with suspicious pace,
Steal through the twilight's accessory ray,
And woo the horrors of the loath'd embrace.

"There at the threshold of her flatt'rer's door,
In earnest accents would her heart complain;
There on her trembling knees his alms implore,
And breathe the anguish of her soul in vain.

"Hard by some silent unfrequented spot,
Now has she feign'd the fond enticing air;
Now in short slumbers every woe forgot,
Now rous'd to all the phrenzy of despair.

"One night I miss'd her on the gloomy stand,
The lonely pavement and the haunted door;
Another pass'd me of the strolling band,
Her ghastly figure still I saw no more.

"Next on the peaceful bier, in pity bourne,
The outcast remnants of her form appear'd;
And thus the pensive muse proceeds to mourn,
On the rough stone by pious strangers rear'd."

EPITAPH.
Here rests from sorrow on the lap of earth,
A wretch to peace and social love unknown;
The dawn of virtue glimmer'd on her birth,
But fell seduction stampt the prey her own.

Frail was her nature, and a snare her charms;
Where syren flattery sooth'd her pliant ear,
Her all she yielded to a traitor's arms;
And gain'd (ungrateful recompense) a tear.

No farther strive her piteous fate to trace,
Nor from oblivion wrest her peaceful shade;
Here lull'd from pain, and shelter'd from disgrace,
No insults threaten, and no thoughts upbraid.
