I own, 'tis true, my frugal Board
Luxurious Plenty never stor'd:
No Pow'r have I thy Throne to awe,
Proud Spain, or give thy Frenzy Law.
Ne'er did Persuasion tip my Tongue
With beauteous Art, to lead along
A following Croud; nor e'er my Wit
For polish'd Ears was nicely fit.
I murmur not:  Plenty annoys
Sometimes, and, sure as Want, destroys:
Pow'r swells to Madness; Eloquence
May prove the Bane of honest Sense:
And Wit Men hate as well as fear;
Our wicked Wit may cost us dear.

Our ev'ry Lot's from God's own Will:
'Twas always best, and must be still.
God's prudent Hand well knows to give;
Happy, could Man as well receive!
Why then repine?  Why ask for more?
'Tis hurtful, or 'twas your's before.
Ask nothing, but what all may find
Who truly seek &mdash; an honest Mind.
"Five thousand Acres (Phenio say'd)
Behold my bending Harvests spread,
My Deer along wide Forests scud,
Tall rev'rend Oaks imbrown the Wood;
My Side-board groans with massy Plate,
Full twenty Liv'rys round me wait.
Yet what, O what are these?  Can these
My Nicer Honour safely please,
Whilst Anstis must be brib'd to trace,
From Saxon Kings, my nameless Race?
What can I do?  From all your Store
One Blessing grant, I ask no more.
Grant me, good Heav'ns, a noble Wife:
Thus shall fair Fame adorn my Life,
My Son with glorious Blood shall glow,
And the rich Tide thro' Ages flow."
Heav'n tir'd the frequent Fool to hear,
Unwilling grants at last his Pray'r.
The Day is come, th' illustrious Bride
Deigns one short Night to grace his Side:
After ten Months of mutual Hate,
My Lady must lye-in in State;
To Light a puny Creature's brought,
A Thing by nine Peers half begot.
The Boy poor Phenio views, and spys
His Grace's Nose, his Lordship's Eyes;
Those Lips the gentle Baron speak,
And the pale Viscount wann'd that Cheek.
He swears 'tis all Sir James's Son,
And damns the Features not his own.

Such are by Av'rice, Pride oppress'd,
The World's own Fools and lawful Jest;
But all Kinds feel the Rage to rise,
The Gay, the Grave, the Mad, the Wise,
For Pow'r each Hour of ev'ry Day,
Fancy's proud Slaves devoutly pray.
Of all who ask, few can obtain;
Happy, who most must wish in vain.

My Fable hear.  Plac'd in a Wood,
A Country Ape earn'd daily Food;
Fond of his fancy'd Parts, and blest,
His Pears and Nuts were thought the best.
But soon uneasy, weary grown
With the low Business of a Clown,
Restless, he fled their vile Employs,
Their servile Cares, and stupid Joys:
His Parts he Thought too meanly far'd,
And Honesty too much rever'd.
It chanc'd, his Friends and he resort
To view the Splendors of a Court&mdash;
Pleas'd with its State, with dazzling Pow'r,
Too much he dreads the wretched Hour
Which warns him Home &mdash; "O spare me, Jove,
Nor bear me from the Place I love:
I hate the Wood's inglorious Ease;
O let me act in scenes like these:
For some small Place I'm surely fit,
All own my Talents and my Wit."

To plague the discontented Beast,
Jove nodded to his fond Request:
The Wretch, by Grandeur's Charms beguil'd,
With crook'd Design, with cunning Sense,
And all the Art of Impudence;
In jealous Hint, Suspicion sly,
His doubtful Tongue would mean a Lye:
Yet no one with a bolder Grace
Could hold out Falshood's naked Face.
Above, below, around he plys,
By secret Workings, where to rise:
Destruction waits each Beast of Worth,
To lead his meaner merit forth.
'Tis dang'rous if the Leopard stays,
The generous Horse is sent to graze:
The noble Tiger's thought too proud,
The Fox has Art, the Dog's too good;
The faithful Dog can't long be in,
His Plainness is too vile a Sin.

'Twas thus he cozen'd Friends and Foes,
And safe o'er ruin'd Virtue rose.
Behold him seize the Royal Ear,
And stalk a weighty Minister!
The Monarch's Eyes decay'd are grown,
A gentle Opiate seals 'em down:
Unaw'd, alone the Realm he sways,
Oppression on it's Vitals preys;
By Rapine fat, buoy'd up by Crimes
In the mad Storm of broken Times,
He swells with mighty Mischief Great,
And boasts a Pow'r to curse a State.

Base Grandeur!  yet how short, how vain!
The rouzing Forest feels her Chain,
She roars aloud her Injuries,
For Justice join the growing Cries;
His Foes are warm, each Friend forsakes,
Sharp Conscience stings, with Fear he quakes,
Like some old ill-built un-propt Wall,
Behold him totter, nod, and fall.

An Ant, in Nature deeply read,
His Rise and End observing, said;
"Just, tho' severe, is Folly's Fate:
Belov'd of Jove, ourselves we hate."
