At Frederick's Shrine, near Thame's imperial Strand,
Their Vigils all the sacred Choir shall keep;
Mute o'er his Urn a mournful Train shall stand,
And ev'ry Muse, and ev'ry Virtue weep.
To dress the Spot where rests his princely Shade,
Fresh Garlands from the Plains each Swain shall bring;
From deep'ning Vale, and Woodland high, each Maid
Shall strip the flow'ry Bosom of the Spring.
There too the graver Patriot, good and old,
Shall come, and stoop to Earth his streaming Cheek;
And, as he kneels to kiss, the hallow'd Mold
Shall mourn, in "Words that weep, and Tears that speak"!
Mean Time the Clouds shall drop their wa'try Head,
The South and Western Breeze shall jointly blow;
And wide, upon their spicy Pinions spread
The Sweets that issue from his Tomb below.

Ah me!  the Swans that sail'd in stately Pride,
And whilom stopt by Kew's lov'd Vale to sing;
How slow and sad they row along the Tide!
How droop their Necks beneath their faded Wing!
For now, since Fate the cruel Arrow sped,
Sad Change befalls the Scenes that charm'd before;
The parting Genius of the Plains is fled,
The Fauns, and Dryad Train are seen no more:
The Nereids sigh beneath their coral Cave,
Their Sea-green Wreathes in rude Disorder torn;
The Bird of Calm forsakes the troubl'd Wave,
The Groves and Springs, and all their Echoe's mourn.

From this sad Hour to many a future Day,
As led by Love to drop a pious Tear,
The Stranger takes his solitary Way,
Thro' these blest Haunts to Remembrance dear:
The village Hind that wont to tread the Place,
Long Tales of his departed Lord shall tell;
With sorrowing Steps his custom'd Walks shall trace,
And point the Bow'r where most he lov'd to dwell.

"Beneath this Beech, beside that hallow'd Stream,
Oft with his Lyre he hail'd the op'ning Year;
And still th' harmonious Strains, and pleasing Theme,
Hang musical on ev'ry Shepherd's Ear.
Oft fir'd to nobler Views, with godlike Mind,
He sought yon poplar Shade in pensive Mood;
For Britain's Weal some Patriot Plan design'd,
Best, firmest, Architect of public Good."

O!  how we hail'd him in his mid Career!
How dawn'd his Morn!  Meridian blaz'd how bright!
'Till envious Death deform'd the rising Year,
In Winter's Solstice like the sudden Night!
So thron'd in Amber Car the radiant Sun,
All glorious mounts the purple Road of Day;
Before his Steeds, Life, Warmth, and Vigour run,
As round he pours in Tides his golden Ray:
But see! &mdash; as down he slopes his hasty Flight,
Dark, sudden Clouds obscure his Ev'ning-Eye;
In dewy Mists he shrouds his shorten'd Light,
And sets in Tears beneath the western Sky.

But you, ye Guardians of the sacred Shears
That wheel the adamantine Spindle round;
Long, long extend Imperial Caesar's Years,
And spare the Thread with which his Life is wound.
Place to the Sire's Account the just Arrear,
Due to his Annals whose fresh Loss we mourn;
Late may we shed for George a second Tear,
Late may his Ashes fill their sacred Urn.
So Peace shall spread her graceful Olive Shade,
Pale Faction hang her Head and shun the Light;
Fair Freedom bid her tow'ring Spires invade
The Clouds, and rival Heav'n's unmeasur'd Height.
Mean Time rich Commerce wide from Pole to Pole,
Shall stretch her Sails, remotest Climes explore;
And, wafted back by prosp'rous Breezes, roll
The Wealth of either World to Albion's Shore.
