Strange power of home, with how-strong-twisted arms
And Gordian-twined knot dost thou enchain me?
Never might fair Calisto's doubled charms,
Nor powerfull Circe's whispering so detain me,
Though all her art she spent to entertain me;
Their presence could not force a weak desire:
But (oh!) thy powerfull absence breeds still-growing fire.

By night thou try'st with strong imagination
To force my sense 'gainst reason to belie it:
Me thinks I see the fast-imprinted fashion
Of every place, and now I fully eye it;
And though with fear, yet cannot well denie it,
Till the morn bell awakes me; then for spite
I shut mine eyes again, and wish back such a night.

But in the day, my never-slak't desire
Will cast to prove by welcome forgerie,
That for my absence I am much the nigher;
Seeking to please with soothing flatterie.
Love's wing is thought; and thought will soonest fly,
Where it findes want:  then as our love is dearer,
Absence yeelds presence; distance makes us nearer.

Ah!  might I in some humble Kentish dale
For ever eas'ly spend my slow-pac'd houres;
Much should I scorn fair Aeton's pleasant vale,
Or Windsor Tempe's self, and proudest towers:
There would I sit safe from the stormie showers,
And laugh the troublous windes, and angrie sky.
Piping (ah!) might I live, and piping might I die!

And would my luckie fortune so much grace me,
As in low Cranebrook, or high Brenchly's hill,
Or in some cabin neare thy dwelling place me,
There would I gladly sport, and sing my fill,
And teach my tender Muse to raise her quill;
And that high Mantuan shepherd self to dare;
If ought with that high Mantuan shepherd mought compare.

There would I chant either thy Gemma's praise,
Or els my Fusca; (fairest shepherdesse)
Or when me list my slender pipe to raise,
Sing of Eliza's fixed mournfulnesse,
And much bewail such wofull heavinesse;
Whil'st she a dear-lov'd Hart (ah lucklesse!) slew:
Whose fall she all too late, too soon, too much, did rue.

But seeing now I am not as I would,
But here among th' unhonour'd willows shade,
The muddy Chame doth me enforced hold;
Here I forsweare my merry piping trade:
My little pipe of seven reeds ymade
(Ah pleasing pipe!) I'le hang upon this bough.
Thou Chame, and Chamish Nymphs, bear witness of my vow.
