I, who of late the useful Cork-screw sung,
Or strove to sing, and in Poetic Verse
Immortalize the Tankard, now prepare
Alike to magnify that engine small
Tobacco-stopper hight, associate fit
For pipe-enamour'd Toper.  Bless'd with thee
How careless does he sit, lolling at ease
Across the summit of contiguous chair.
Through the dark alley of the curved tube
The flavour of the burning Weed he draws,
And at each puff he teaches ev'ry cloud
In what due poize to ride athwart the air,
Or curl its spiral head.  Each little cloud
In exhalation climbs the paper'd plain,
Or horizontal swims along the room,
Obedient to the blast.  Virginian Plant,
To dust consum'd, demands the pressure light;
Then with a Phyz of Gravity profound,
His hand in pocket dives, where thou, perhaps,
With pence of Birmingham art safely lodg'd;
Toothpicks and keys harsh-rattling on the ear.
Haply he finds thee.  Strait a sudden smile,
Caught from internal joy, serenes his brow,
Seen thro' the smoaky shade.  So looks the man
Wrap'd in distressful thought, Misfortune's son,
As thro' the Mall, for want of chop, or steak,
He saunters at Meridian, when perchance
His roving eye on Splendid Shilling lights.

Begirt with many a friend, oft-times at eve,
(Whether with Bacchus, Paynim-fabled God,
The Vine's exhilarating flood I quaff
With lips impurpled, or descend to drown
My care-tir'd thoughts in Porter's humble bath)
O!  let me grasp thy waist, be thou of wood,
Or laevigated steel; for well 'tis known
Thy habit is diverse.  In iron clad,
Sometimes thy feature roughens to the sight;
And oft transparent art thou seen in glass
Portending frangibility.  The son
Of lab'ring mechanism here displays
Exuberance of skill.  The curious knot,
The motley flourish winding down thy sides,
And freaks of fancy pour upon the view
Their complicated charms, and as they please,
Astonish.  While with glee thy touch I feel,
No harm my finger dreads.  No fractur'd pipe
I ask, or splinter's aid, wherewith to press
The rising ashes down.  Oh!  bless my hand,
Chief when thou com'st with hollow circle, crown'd
With sculptur'd signet, bearing in thy womb
The treasur'd Corkscrew.  Thus a threefold service
In firm alliance may'st thou boast.  And thus
Myself I serve, and on occasion due,
Extend thy use to an embarrass'd friend.
