For once I dare to touch the sounding harp
And tune the Caxon's praise; nor let the beau
With Sunday tunic, and Bag-wigg elate,
The subject disapprove; for crown'd with this,
And with a snow-white shirt, and shilling blest,
I too can strut, and sip my coffee down,
And mingle in the Mall without a blush.
What!  shall my spirits droop, because my Pate
With all the pomp that Hair can boast
Is not surrounded!  such as busy Child,
Of lordly Physick oft presumes to wear,
Index of knowledge and of thought profound!
Nor yet, my brain grow sick, because the Tye
Of Barrister loquacious is not thine.
Be't his to triumph in the powder'd badge
Of consequence external; spoil'd of this,
Ah!  with what languid spirits would he plead!
Or should he travel to the utmost verge
Of Rhet'rick's maze, multiloquent, beyond
A modern's daring, or beyond the steps
Of that fam'd Orator, who shone the sun
Or eloquence divine, and with its rays
Expanding wide illum'd the Roman age,
What plaudit would he draw, if Cut or Scratch
Debas'd his temples, and his cheek expos'd?
But tho' the stately Tye such honour beams
Round semi-circled Noddle; tho' the Cue
Delights the Prigg, nor less the silken Bag
Has pow'r to charm, the Caxon still I prize.
For those require the wearer's nicest care,
The sport of ev'ry wind, and ev'ry drop
Of piercing rain, and flake of airy snow
To fluid crystals melting; and when night
Invites him to repose, then must they rest,
Or pendant on a peg, or soft reclin'd
Within the concave of inclosing Box,
Else all their fine oeconomy is lost.
Such caution does my Caxon never ask,
At all times uniform, whether on floor
Or urinal it lies, or 'gainst the cobweb wall
It hangs devoid of state, or whether Pugg
In dust-hole drags it for an easy bed,
Or chance may throw it careless in the street
To mingle with the chaos of a dunghill.
Nor does this Stranger to the comb of taste
Demand or oil or powder &mdash; need I tell
How, when I regulate its rumpled form,
I dash it on a post with stroke oblique,
Or full direct upon a table's verge!
Need I recite the dangers it hath past,
How yet it reigns secure!  or to the world
Need I proclaim (when dress-enwraptur'd beau,
Fashion's Apprentice, Affectation's Child,
In Bag-wigg glory struts) how droll it looks,
As laughing ev'ry flutt'ring fop to scorn.
Let not the justice, whose idea-pot
Encircling curls keep warm the Caxon spurn,
For many a Wit and philosophic sage
Beneath thy roof darts forth the pointed jest,
But when in thought profound they place its form
Transverse, or twirl it staring o'er their front
In wide projection, then the laugh it moves;
Like as I've seen, with pleasure often seen,
Droll Howard, when he screws his comic Phyz,
The Bob shall fade away, the Major's Lock
Shall drop its Curl, and Scratches shrink in wear,
But thou, my Caxon, thou shalt be the same
Unhurt, tho' Sirius whirl his domain of fire
Thro' Summer's faint Domain, and on thy Bard
Dart Heat intolerable &mdash; yet unhurt
Tho' Boreas rave, and Winter weep the loss
Of absent Autumn, as my temples feel
The copious tears descending from his eye.
