Friendship!  Thou soft, propitious  Pow'r!
Fair Regent of the social Hour!
Sublime thy Joys, nor understood,
But by the Worthy and the Good!
Tho' Vice assumes thy sacred Name,
'Tis all a base, detested Claim.
In Heav'n if Love and Friendship dwell,
Can they associate e'er with Hell?

Thou art the same thro' Change of Times,
Thro' frozen Zones, and burning Climes;
From the Aequator to the Pole,
The same kind Angel thro' the Whole.
And since thy Choice is always free,
I bless Thee for thy Smiles on me.

When Sorrows swell the Tempest high,
Thou, a kind Port, art always nigh!
For broken Hearts a sov'reign Cure,
Not Meccha's Balsam half so sure!
And when returning Comforts rise,
Thou the bright Sun, that gilds our Skies!

While these Ideas warm'd my Breast,
My weary Eye-lids stole to Rest;
When Fancy reassum'd the Theme,
And furnish'd this instructive Dream.

I sail'd upon a stormy Sea,
(Thousands embark'd alike with me)
My Skiff was small, and weak beside,
Not built, methought, to stem the Tide.
The Winds along the Surges sweep,
The Wrecks lie scatter'd thro' the Deep;
Aloud the foaming Billows roar,
Unfriendly Rocks obstruct the Shore.

While all our various Course pursue,
A spacious Isle salutes our View.
Two Queens, with Tempers differing wide,
This new discover'd World divide.
A River parts their proper Claim,
And TRUTH its celebrated Name.

I saw a beauteous Tract of Ground,
With ev'ry Spot improv'd around.
The Seasons temp'rate, soft, and mild,
And a kind Sun, that always smil'd.
Few Storms molest the Natives here;
Cold is the only Ill they fear.
This happy Clime, and grateful Soil,
With Plenty crowns the Lab'rer's Toil.

Here FRIENDSHIP'S Kingdom gently grew,
Her Realms were small, her Subjects few.
A thousand Charms the Palace grace,
A Rock of Adamant its Base.
Tho' Thunders roll, and Lightnings fly,
The Structure braves th' inclement Sky.
Ev'n TIME, which other Piles devours,
And mocks the Pride of human Pow'rs,
Partial to FRIENDSHIP'S Pile alone,
Cements the Joints, and binds the Stone;
Ripens the Beauties of the Place,
And calls to Life each latent Grace.

Around the Throne, in Order stand
Four Amazons, a trusty Band;
Friends, ever faithful to advise,
Or to defend, when Dangers rise.
Here FORTITUDE in Coat of Mail!
There JUSTICE lifts her golden Scale!
Two hardy Chiefs!  who persevere,
With Form erect, and Brow severe;
Who smile at Perils, Pains, and Death,
And triumph with their latest Breath.

TEMP'RANCE, that comely Matron's near
Mother of all the VIRTUES Here;
Adorn'd with every blooming Grace,
Without one Wrinkle in her Face.

But PRUDENCE most attracts the Sight,
And shines pre-eminently bright.
To view her various Thoughts that rise,
She holds a Mirrour to her Eyes;
The Mirrour, faithful to its Charge,
Reflects the Virgin's Soul at large.

A VIRTUE with a softer Air,
Was Handmaid to the regal Fair.
The Nymph, indulgent, constant, kind,
Derives from Heav'n her spotless Mind;
When Actions wear a dubious Face,
Puts the best Meaning on the Case;
She spreads her Hands, and bares her Breast,
Takes in the Naked and Distress'd;
Prefers the hungry Orphan's Cries,
And from her Queen obtains Supplies.
The Maid, who acts this lovely Part,
Grasp'd in her Hand a bleeding Heart.
Fair CHARITY!  be Thou my guest,
And be thy constant Couch my Breast.

But Virtues of inferior Name,
Croud round the Throne with equal Claim;
In Loyalty by none surpass'd,
They hold Allegiance to the last.
Not ancient Records e'er can show,
That one deserted to the Foe.

As round I gaz'd, my Eye descry'd
A pow'rful Realm extending wide;
Whose Bound'ries in the East begun,
And stretch'd to meet the Southern Sun.
Here FLATT'RY boasts despotic Sway,
And basks in all the Warmth of Day.

Long practis'd in Deception's School,
The Tyrant knew the Arts to rule;
Elated with th' Imperial Robe,
She plans the Conquest of the Globe;
And aided by her servile Trains,
Leads Kings, and Sons of Kings, in Chains.
Her darling Minister is PRIDE,
(Who ne'er was known to change his Side)
A Friend to all her Interests just,
And active to discharge his Trust;
Caress'd alike by high and low,
The Idol of the Belle and Beau:
Each Hour he shews the Statesman's Skill,
And forms the Subjects to his Will;
Enters their Houses and their Hearts,
And gains his Point before He parts.
Sure never Minister was known,
So zealous for his Sov'reign's Throne!

Three Sisters, similar in Mien,
Were Maids of Honour to the Queen;
Who farther Favours shar'd beside,
As Daughters of her Statesman PRIDE.
The first CONCEIT, with tow'ring Crest,
Who look'd with Scorn upon the rest;
Fond of herself, nor less, I deem,
Than Dutchess in her own Esteem.

Next AFFECTATION, fair and young,
With half-form'd Accents on her Tongue,
Whose antic Shapes, and various Face,
Distorted every native Grace.

Then VANITY, a wanton Maid,
Flaunting in Brussels, and Brocade;
Fantastic, frolicksome, and wild,
With all the Trinkets of a Child.

The People, loyal to their Queen,
Wore their Attachments in their Mien:
With chearful Heart they Homage paid,
And happiest He, who most obey'd.
While They, who sought their own Applause,
Promoted most their Sov'reign's Cause.
But still their Minds were fraught with Guile,
Their Manners dissolute and vile;
And every Tribe, like Pagans, run
To kneel before the Rising Sun.

But now some clam'rous Sounds arise,
And all the pleasing Vision flies.

Once more I clos'd my Eyes to sleep,
And gain'd th' imaginary Deep:
FANCY presided at the Helm,
And steer'd me back to FRIENDSHIP'S Realm.
But, oh!  with Horror I relate
The Revolutions of her State.
The Trojan Chief cou'd hardly more
His Asiatic Tow'rs deplore.

The TYRANT view'd those fairer Plains,
With longing Eyes, where FRIENDSHIP reigns;
With Envy heard her Neighbour's Fame,
And often sigh'd to gain the same.
At length, by Pride and Int'rest fir'd,
To FRIENDSHIP'S Kingdom she aspir'd.

And now she personates a Foe,
Now plans in Thought some mighty Blow;
Drew out her Forces on the Green,
Determin'd to invade the Queen.

The River TRUTH their March withstood,
And roll'd her formidable Flood:
Her Current strong, and deep, and clear,
No Fords were found, no Ferries near:
But as the Troops approach'd the Waves,
Their Fears suggest a Thousand Graves;
They all retir'd with Haste extreme,
And shudder'd at the dang'rous Stream.

HYPOCRISY the Gulph explores;
She forms a Bridge, and joins the Shores.
Thus often Art or Fraud prevails,
When military Prowess fails.
The Troops an easy Passage find,
And Vic'try follows close behind.

FRIENDSHIP with Ardor charg'd her Foes,
And now the Flight promiscuous grows:
But FLATT'RY threw a poison'd Dart,
And pierc'd the Empress to the Heart.
The VIRTUES all around were seen,
To fall in Heaps about the Queen.
The Tyrant strip'd the mangled Fair,
She wore her Spoils, assum'd her Air;
And mounting next the Suff'rer's Throne,
Claim'd the Queen's Titles for her own.

Ah!  injur'd Maid, aloud I cry'd,
Ah!  injur'd Maid, the Rocks reply'd:
But judge my Griefs, and share them too,
For the sad Tale pertains to you.
Judge, Reader, how my Griefs abound,
When FRIENDSHIP'S Foes were mine I found;
When the late Scene of Pride and Guile
Was Britain's poor degen'rate Isle.

The Amazons, who prop'd the State,
Haply surviv'd the general Fate.
JUSTICE to Powis-House is fled,
And Yorke sustains her radiant Head.
The Virtue FORTITUDE appears
In open Day at Ligonier's;
Illustrious Heroine of the Sky,
Who leads to vanquish or to die!
'Twas SHE our Vet'rans Breasts inspir'd,
When Belgia's faithless Sons retir'd:
For Tournay's treach'rous Tow'rs can tell
Britannia's Children greatly fell.

No partial Virtue of the Plain!
She rous'd the Lions of the Main:
Hence VERNON'S little Fleet succeed;
Hence gen'rous CORNEWALL chose to bleed;
Hence GREENVILLE glorious! &mdash; for she smil'd
On the young Hero from a Child.

Tho' in high Life such Virtues dwell,
They'll suit Plebeian Breasts as well.
Say, that the Mighty and the Great
Blaze like Meridian Suns of State;
Effulgent Excellence display,
Like HALIFAX in Floods of Day;
Our lesser Orbs shall pour their Light,
Like the mild Crescent of the Night.
Tho' pale our Beams, and small our Sphere,
Still we will shine serene and clear.

Give to the Judge the Scarlet Gown,
To martial Souls the Civic Crown:
What then?  Is Merit their's alone?
Have we no Worth to call our own?
Shall we not vindicate our Part,
In the firm Breast, and upright Heart?
Reader, these Virtues may be thine,
Tho' in superior Life they shine.
I can't discharge great HARDWICK'S Trust&mdash;
True &mdash; but my Soul shall still be just.
And tho' I can't the State defend,
I'll draw the Sword to serve my Friend.

Two golden Virtues are behind,
Of equal Import to the Mind.
These Virtues, let the World agree,
Are constant Guests to you and me.
Or rather let them all prevail,
We'll hold the Mirrour, and the Scale;
Restrain Desires, that soar too high,
And dare be honest, tho' we die.
