Man is deceiv'd by outward Show&mdash;
'Tis a plain homespun Truth I know;
The Fraud prevails at every Age,
So says the School-boy, and the Sage:
Yet still we hug the dear Deceit,
And still exclaim against the Cheat.
But whence this inconsistent Part?
Say, Moralists, who know the Heart:
If you'll this Labyrinth pursue,
I'll go before, and find the Clue.

I dreamt ('twas on a Birth-day Night)
A sumptuous Palace rose to Sight:
The Builder had, thro' every Part,
Observ'd the chastest Rules of Art;
Raphael and Titian had display'd
All the Full Force of Light and Shade;
Around the livery'd Servants wait;
An aged Porter kept the Gate.

As I was traversing the Hall,
Where Brussels' Looms adorn'd the Wall,
(Whose Tap'stry shews, without my Aid,
A Nun is no such useless Maid)
A graceful Person came in View,
(His Form, it seems, is known to few;)
Plain was his Dress, devoid of Lace,
But Charms!  a thousand in his Face.

This, Sir, your Property?  I cry'd&mdash;
Master and Mansion coincide;
Where all, indeed, is truly great,
And proves, that Bliss may dwell with State.
Pray, Sir, indulge a Stranger's Claim,
And grant the Favour of your Name.

CONTENT, the lovely Form reply'd;
But think not, here that I reside:
Here lives a Courtier, base and sly;
An open, honest Rustic, I.
Our Taste and Manners disagree,
His Levee boasts no Charms for me:
His Titles, and the Smiles of Kings,
To me are cheap unheeded Things.
('Tis Virtue can alone impart
The Patent of a Ducal Heart;
Unless this Herald speaks him great,
What shall avail the Glare of State?)
Those secret Charms are my Delight,
Which shine remote from public Sight:
Passions subdu'd, Desires at Rest,&mdash;
And hence his Chaplain shares my Breast.

There was a Time (his Grace can tell)
I knew the Duke exceeding well;
Knew every Secret of his Heart;
In Truth, we never were apart:
But when the Court became his End,
He turn'd his Back upon his Friend.

One Day I call'd upon his Grace,
Just as the Duke had got a Place:
I thought (but thought amiss, 'tis clear)
I shou'd be welcome to the Peer:
Yes, welcome to a Man in Pow'r,
And so I was &mdash; for half an Hour.
But he grew weary of his Guest,
And soon discarded me his Breast;
Upbraided me with Want of Merit,
And most for Poverty of Spirit.

You relish not the great Man's Lot?
Come then, I'll take thee to my Cot.
Think me not partial to the Great,
I'm a sworn Foe to Pride and State:
No Monarchs share my kind Embrace,
There's scarce a Monarch knows my Face:
CONTENT shuns Courts, and oft'ner dwells
With modest Worth in humble Cells;
There's no Complaint, tho' brown the Bread,
Or the cold Stone sustain the Head;
Tho' hard the Couch, and coarse the Meat,
Still the brown Loaf and Sleep are sweet.

Far from the City I reside,
And a thatch'd Cottage all my Pride.
True to my Heart, I seldom roam,
Because I find my Joys at home:
For foreign Visits then begin,
When the Man feels a Void within.

But tho' from Towns and Crouds I fly,
No Humourist, nor Cynic, I.
Amidst sequester'd Shades I prize
The Friendships of the Good, and Wise.
Bid VIRTUE and her Sons attend,
VIRTUE will tend thee, I'm her Friend;
Tell thee, I'm faithful, constant, kind,
And meek, and lowly, and resign'd;
Will say, there's no Distinction known
Betwixt her Houshold, and my own.

AUTHOR.
If these the Friendships you pursue,
Your Friends, I fear, are very few.
So little Company, you say,
Yet fond of Home from Day to Day!
How do you shun Detraction's Rod?
I doubt your Neighbours think you odd!

CONTENT.
I commune with myself at Night,
And ask my Heart, if all be right:
If, "Right," replies my faithful Breast,
I smile, and close my Eyes to Rest.

AUTHOR.
You seem regardless of the Town:
Pray, Sir, how stand you with the Gown?

CONTENT.
The Clergy say, they love me well,
Whether they do, they best can tell:
They paint me modest, friendly, wise,
And always praise me to the Skies;
But, if Conviction's at the Heart,
Why not a correspondent Part?
For shall the learned Tongue prevail,
If Actions preach a different Tale?
Who'll seek my Door, or grace my Walls,
When neither Dean nor Prelate calls?

With those my Friendships most obtain,
Who prize their Duty more than Gain;
Soft flow the Hours whene'er we meet,
And conscious Virtue is our Treat;
Our harmless Breasts no Envy know,
And hence we fear no secret Foe;
Our Walks Ambition ne'er attends,
And hence we ask no pow'rful Friends;
We wish the best to Church and State,
But leave the Steerage to the Great;
Careless, who rises, or who falls,
And never dream of vacant Stalls;
Much less, by Pride or Int'rest drawn,
Sigh for the Mitre, and the Lawn.

Observe the Secrets of my Art,
I'll fundamental Truths impart:
If you'll my wise Advice pursue,
I'll quit my Hut, and dwell with you.

The Passions are a num'rous Croud,
Imperious, positive, and loud:
Curb these licentious Sons of Strife,
They kindle half the Storms of Life:
If they grow mutinous, and rave,
They are the Masters, Thou their Slave.

Regard the World with cautious Eye,
Nor raise your Expectations high:
See, that the ballanc'd Scales be such,
You neither fear, nor wish too much.
For Disappointment's not the Thing,
'Tis Pride and Passion give the Sting.
Life is a Sea, where Storms arise,
('Tis Folly talks of cloudless Skies:)
He, who contracts his swelling Sail,
Eludes the Fury of the Gale.

Be still, nor anxious Thoughts employ,
Distrust imbitters present Joy:
On God for all Events depend;
You cannot want, when God's your Friend.
Weigh well your Part, and do your best;
Leave to Omnipotence the rest.
To him, who form'd thee in the Womb,
And guides from Cradle to the Tomb.
Can the fond Mother slight her Boy?
Can she forget her prattling Joy?
Say then, shall sov'reign Love desert
The humble, and the honest Heart?
Heav'n may not grant thee all thy Mind;
Yet say not thou, that Heav'n's unkind.
God is alike, both good, and wise,
In what he grants, and what denies:
Perhaps, what Goodness gives to-day,
To-morrow Goodness takes away.

You say, that Troubles intervene,
That Sorrows darken half the Scene.
True &mdash; and this Consequence you see,
The World was ne'er design'd for thee:
You're like a Passenger below,
That stays perhaps a Night or so;
But still his native Country lies
Beyond the Boundaries of the Skies.

Of Heav'n ask Virtue, Wisdom, Health,
But never let thy Pray'r be Wealth.
If Food be thine, (tho' little Gold)
And Raiment to repel the Cold,
Such as my Nature's Wants suffice,
Not what from Pride and Folly rise;
If soft the Motions of thy Soul,
And a calm Conscience crowns the whole;
Add but a Friend to all this Store,
You can't in Reason wish for more:
And if kind Heav'n this Comfort brings,
'Tis more than Heav'n bestows on Kings.

He spake &mdash; The airy Spectre flies,
And strait the sweet Illusion dies.
The Vision, at the early Dawn,
Consign'd me to the thoughtful Morn;
To all the Cares of waking Clay,
And inconstant Dreams of Day.
