SONNET IV.
O thou pale Sun!  that wrapp'd in mist and cloud,
Seem'st like thy sister cold and sad, the moon,
Oh!  pierce, in pity pierce thy watery shroud,
And grant, 'tis all I ask, one half hour's boon
Of light, effulgent sovereign of the noon!
For bleak o'er ocean blows the northern gale,
And we are come from where eternal June
Nurses with tepid breath Madeira's vale:
Then come thou forth, and flush my visage pale!
Thou com'st; ah!  no, that effort is in vain,
But, like some shield, thou twinklest thro' thy veil,
And now with ease art gaz'd upon again;
Darkness and cold reclaim the billowy plain,
And I may weave a fresh, and haply fruitless strain.

SONNET VI.
Ye clouds, that fringe the confines of the sky,
With well-pleas'd gaze the poet dwells on you;
But lovelier and more dear you meet mine eye,
As glad I travel o'er the waters blue,
To seek the land where life's first breath I drew.
Let the bright muse, with her creative powers,
Form of your varying shape, and rainbow-hue
Arabian palaces, and fairy bowers:
Visions more sweet on me my fancy pours;
You seem the scenes, from which too long I roam;
There, of my natal  hills the dark ridge towers,
Here, sinks the elm-clad vale which hides my home,
Whilst yon thin vapour, rising with the breeze,
Seems like blue smoke slow curling thro' the trees.

SONNET VIII.
Ah!  why go down in clouds, thou glorious sun?
Why with dishonor shroud thy radiant head?
For bravely thou, this day, thy work hast done,
And thousand blessings thro' the world hast spread:
Thee, thanks the gatherer of the vintage red,
And thee, the reaper of the harvest dun;
Thee, thank the toilers in the grassy mead,
Thee, Flora's, thee, Pomona's bloom-crown'd son:
Thee, blesses the poor wretch, whose thread is spun,
Whom to thy beam his limbs with pain have  led;
In thee, the youth, in whom health's pulses run,
Exults, and feels his pulses quickened;
Glorious has been thy life, and hallowed;
Then why not proud and bright thy dying bed?

SONNET XXIII.
If beauty, innocence, and cheerfulness,
Can make thee happy in this world below,
Thee, Maiden, Heaven's best gifts conspire to bless,
Nor Earth to thee shall be a scene of woe;
But Youth and Beauty pass away, we know;
And Innocence, by this bad world and vain
Polluted, fades, as Heav'n's own spotless snow
Decays commingling with the Earth's foul stain:
Nor, Virtue gone, will Cheerfulness remain;
Then, Maiden, may thy blameless lot be cast
In that sweet vale, where Peace and Virtue reign;
So shall the Sun which smiles upon thee last,
View thee the same, as even now thou art,
As good and pure of mind, as warm and light of heart.

SONNET XXXIV.  GENEVA.
Leman, thy Lake, with its sweet blending Rhone,
Romantic shores, still lovelier, which embrace thee,
Shall charm my heart, 'till life's last charms have flown,
Nor time, nor place, nor grief, nor joy efface thee:
But clear and bright, as at this hour I trace thee,
The wave-wash'd castle, the hill-circling town,
The villages beneath the cliffs, that grace thee,
The vines that fringe, the spiry firs that crown,
The bleak, black rocks that ever seem to frown,
The Chalets high as is the falcon's nest,
The snow-clad peaks, that on the clouds look down,
Where the sun's first, last beams in crimson rest;
These, clear as in thy mirror blue express'd,
Shall live for aye reflected in my breast.
