Attend my Visions, thoughtless Youths,
Ere long you'll think them weighty Truths;
Prudent it were to think so now,
Ere Age has silver'd o'er your Brow:
For He, who at his early Years
Has sown in Vice, shall reap in Tears.
If Folly has possess'd his Prime,
Disease shall gather Strength by Time,
Poison shall rage in every Vein,&mdash;
Nor Penitence dilute the Stain:
And when each Hour shall urge his Fate,
Thought, like the Doctor, comes too late.

The Subject of my Song is HEALTH,
A Good superior far to Wealth.
Can the young Mind distrust its Worth!
Consult the Monarchs of the Earth:
Imperial Czars, and Sultans, own
No Gem so bright, that decks their Throne:
Each for this Pearl his Crown would quit,
And turn a Rustic, or a Cit.

Mark, tho' the Blessing's lost with Ease,
'Tis not recover'd, when you please.
Say not, that Gruels shall avail,
Too late apply'd such Means will fail.
Say not, Apollo's Sons succeed,
Apollo's Son is Egypt's Reed.
How fruitless the Physician's Skill,
How vain the penitential Pill,
The Marble Monuments proclaim,
The humbler Turf confirms the same!
Prevention is the better Cure,
So says the Proverb, and 'tis sure.

Wou'd you extend your narrow Span,
And make the most of Life you can;
Wou'd you, when Med'cines cannot save,
Descend with Ease into the Grave;
Calmly retire, like Evening Light,
And chearful bid the World Good Night;
Let Temp'rance constantly preside,
Our best Physician, Friend, and Guide!
Wou'd you to Wisdom make Pretence,
Proud to be thought a Man of Sense;
Let Temp'rance  (always Friend to Fame)
With steddy Hand direct your Aim;
Or, like an Archer in the Dark,
Your random Shaft will miss the Mark:
For they, who slight her golden Rules,
In Wisdom's Volume stand for Fools.

But Morals, unadorn'd by Art,
Are seldom known to reach the Heart.
I'll therefore strive to raise my Theme,
With all the Scenery of Dream.

Soft were my Slumbers, sweet my Rest,
Such as the Infant's on the Breast;
When Fancy, ever on the Wing,
And fruitful as the genial Spring,
Presented in a Blaze of Light,
A new Creation to my Sight.

A rural Landscape I descry'd,
Drest in the Robes of Summer Pride;
The Herds adorn'd the sloping Hills,
That glitter'd with their tinkling Rills;
Below the fleecy Mothers stray'd,
And round their sportive Lambkins play'd.

Nigh to a murm'ring Brook I saw
An humble Cottage thatch'd with Straw;
Behind, a Garden that supply'd
All Things for Use, and none for Pride:
Beauty prevail'd thro' every Part,
But more more of Nature than of Art.

Hail, thou sweet, calm, unenvied Seat!
I said, and bless'd the fair Retreat:
Here wou'd I pass my remnant Days,
Unknown to Censure, or to Praise;
Forget the World, and be forgot,
As Pope describes his Vestal's Lot.

While thus I mus'd, a beauteous Maid
Step'd from a Thicket's neighb'ring Shade;
Not Hampton's Gallery can boast,
Nor Hudson paint so fair a Toast:
She claim'd the Cottage for her own,
To HEALTH a Cottage is a Throne.

The Annals say (to prove her Worth)
The GRACES solemniz'd her Birth:
Garlands of various Flow'rs they wrought,
The Orchard's blushing Pride they brought:
Hence in her Face the Lilly speaks,
And hence the Rose, which paints her Cheeks;
The Cherry gave her Lips to glow,
Her Eyes were Debtors to the Sloe;
And, to compleat the lovely Fair,
'Tis said, the Chesnut stain'd her Hair.

The Virgin was averse to Courts,
But often seen in rural Sports;
When in her rosy Vest the Morn
Walks o'er the Dew-bespangled Lawn,
The Nymph is first to form the Race,
Or wind the Horn, and lead the Chace.

Sudden I heard a shouting Train,
Glad Acclamations fill'd the Plain:
Unbounded Joy improv'd the Scene,
For HEALTH was loud proclaim'd a Queen.

Two smiling Cherubs grac'd her Throne,
(To modern Courts, I fear, unknown;)
One was the Nymph, that loves the Light,
Fair INNOCENCE, array'd in white;
With Sister PEACE in close Embrace,
And Heav'n all opening in her Face.

The Reign was long, the Empire great,
And VIRTUE, Minister of State.
In other Kingdoms, ev'ry Hour,
You hear of Vice preferr'd to Pow'r:
VICE was a perfect Stranger here;
No Knaves engross'd the Royal Ear:
Nor Fools obtain'd this Monarch's Grace;
VIRTUE dispos'd of every Place.

What sickly Appetites are ours,
Still varying with the varying Hours!
And tho' from good to bad we range,
No Matter, says the Fool, "'Tis Change."

Her Subjects now express'd apace
Dissatisfaction in their Face:
Some view'd the State with Envy's Eye,
Some were displeas'd, they knew not why:
When Faction, ever bold and vain,
With Rigour tax'd their Monarch's Reign.

Thus shou'd an Angel from above,
Fraught with Benevolence and Love,
Descend to Earth, and here impart
Important Truths to mend the Heart.
Would not th' instructive Sage despise,
And send Him to his former Skies.
A dang'rous hostile Pow'r arose
To HEALTH, whose Household were her foes:
A Harlot's loose Attire she wore,
And LUX'RY was the Name she bore.
This Princess of unbounded Sway,
Whom Asia's softer Sons obey,
Made War against the Queen of HEALTH,
Assisted by the Troops of WEALTH.

The Queen was first to take the Field,
Arm'd with her Helmet and her Shield;
Temper'd with such superior Art,
That both were Proof to every Dart.
Two warlike Chiefs approach'd the Green,
And wond'rous Fav'rites with the Queen:
Both were of Amazonian Race,
Both high in Merit, and in Place.
Here RESOLUTION march'd, whose Soul
No Fear could shake, no Pow'r controul;
The Heroine wore a Roman Vest,
A Lion's Heart inform'd her Breast.
There PRUDENCE shone, whose Bosom wrought
With all the various Plans of Thought;
'Twas Her's to bid the Troops engage,
And teach the Battle where to rage.

And now the Syren's Armies press,
Their Van was headed by EXCESS:
The mighty Wings, that form'd the Side,
Commanded by that Giant PRIDE:
While SICKNESS, and her Sisters, PAIN,
And POVERTY, the Center gain:
REPENTANCE, with a Brow severe,
And DEATH, were station'd in the Rear.

HEALTH rang'd her Troops with matchless Art,
And acted the defensive Part:
Her Army posted on a Hill,
Plainly bespoke superior Skill:
Hence were discover'd thro' the Plain,
The Motions of the hostile Train;
While PRUDENCE, to prevent Surprize,
Oft sally'd with her trusty Spies;
Explor'd each Ambuscade below,
And reconnoitred well the Foe.

When LUX'RY saw, that Force must fail,
She said, Let Artifice prevail;
Henceforth Hostilities shall cease,
I'll send to HEALTH, and offer Peace.
Strait she dispatch'd, with Pow'rs compleat,
PLEASURE, her Minister, to treat.
This wicked Strumpet topp'd her Part,
And sow'd Sedition to the Heart;
Thro' the Queen's Troops the Poison ran,
All were infected to a Man.
Her wary Generals were won
By PLEASURE'S Wiles, and Both undone.

JOVE held the Troops in high Disgrace,
And bade Diseases blast their Race;
Look'd on the Queen with melting Eyes,
And snatch'd his Darling to the Skies:
Who still regards those wiser Few,
That dare her Dictates to pursue.
For where her stricter Law prevails,
Tho' Passion prompts, or Vice assails;
Long shall they cloudless Skies behold,
And their Calm Sun-set beam with Gold.
