Hear, ye fair Mothers of our Isle,
Nor scorn your Poet's homely Style.
What!  tho' my Thoughts be quaint or new,
I'll warrant, that my Doctrine's true:
Or if my Sentiments be old,
Remember, Truth is sterling Gold.

You judge it of important Weight
To keep your rising Offspring strait:
For This such anxious Moments feel,
And ask the friendly Aids of Steel:
For This import the distant Cane,
Or slay the Monarch of the Main.
And shall the Soul be warp'd aside
By Passion, Prejudice, and Pride?
Deformity of Heart I call
The worst Deformity of all.
Your Cares to Body are confin'd,
Few fear Obliquity of Mind.
Why not adorn the better Part!
This is a nobler Theme for Art.
For what is Form, or what is Face,
But the Soul's Index, or its Case?

Now take a Simile at Hand,
Compare the mental Soil to Land.
Shall Fields be till'd with annual Care,
And minds lie fallow ev'ry Year?
O!  since the Crop depends on You,
Give them the Culture which is due:
Hoe every Weed, and dress the Soil,
So Harvest shall repay your Toil.

If human Minds resemble Trees,
(As every Moralist agrees)
Prune all the Straglers of your Vine,
Then shall the purple Clusters shine.
The Gard'ner knows, that fruitful Life
Demands his salutary Knife:
For every wild luxuriant Shoot
Or robs the Bloom, or starves the Fruit.

A Satyrist in Roman Times,
When Rome like Britain groan'd with Crimes,
Asserts it for a sacred Truth,
That PLEASURES are the Bane of Youth:
That Sorrows such Pursuits attend,
Or such Pursuits in Sorrows end:
That all the wild Advent'rer gains
Are Perils, Penitence, and Pains.

Approve, ye Fair, the Roman Page,
And bid your Sons revere the Sage;
In Study spend their Midnight Oil,
And string their Nerves by manly Toil.
Thus shall they grow, like TEMPLE wise,
Thus future LOCKS and NEWTONS rise;
Or hardy Chiefs to wield the Lance,
And save us from the Chains of France.
Yes, bid your Sons betimes forgo
Those treach'rous Paths where PLEASURES grow;
Where the young Mind is Folly's Slave,
And every Virtue finds a Grave.

Let each bright Character be nam'd,
For Wisdom or for Valour fam'd:
Are the dear Youths to Science prone?
Tell, how th' immortal BACON shone!
Who, leaving meaner Joys to Kings,
Soar'd high on Contemplation's Wings;
Rang'd the fair Fields of Nature o'er,
Where never Mortal trod before:
BACON!  whose vast capacious Plan
Bespoke him Angel, more than Man!

Does Love of Martial Fame inspire?
Cherish, ye Fair, the gen'rous Fire;
Teach them to spurn inglorious Rest,
And rouse the Hero in their Breast;
Paint Cressy's vanquish'd Field anew,
Their Souls shall kindle at the View;
Resolv'd to conquer or to fall,
When Liberty and Britain call.
Thus shall they rule the crimson Plain,
Or hurl their Thunders thro' the Main;
Gain with their Blood, nor grudge the Cost,
What their degen'rate Sires have lost:
The Laurel thus shall grace their Brow,
As CHURCHIL'S once, or WARREN'S now.

One Summer Evening as I stray'd
Along the Silent Moon-light Glade;
With these Reflections in my Breast,
Beneath an Oak I sunk to Rest;
A gentle Slumber intervenes,
And Fancy dress'd instructive Scenes.

Methought a spacious Road I 'spy'd,
And stately Trees adorn'd its Side,
Frequented by a giddy Croud
Of thoughtless Mortals, vain, and loud;
Who trip'd with jocund Heel along,
And bade me join their smiling Throng.

I strait obey'd &mdash; Persuasion hung
Like Honey on the Speaker's Tongue.
A cloudless Sun improv'd the Day,
And Pinks and Roses strew'd our Way.

Now as our Journey we pursue,
A beauteous Fabrick rose to View;
A stately Dome!  and sweetly grac'd
With every Ornament of Taste.
This Structure was a Female's Claim,
And PLEASURE was the Monarch's Name.

The Hall we enter'd uncontroul'd,
And saw the Queen enthron'd on Gold:
Arabian Sweets perfum'd the Ground,
And laughing Cupids perch'd around;
A flowing Vest adorn'd the Fair,
And flow'ry Chaplets wreath'd her Hair:
The GRACES deck'd her with their Smiles,
And FRAUD bestow'd her artful Wiles;
LOVE taught her lisping Tongue to speak,
And form'd the Dimple in her Cheek;
The LILLY, blended with the ROSE,
The Tincture of her Face compose;
Nor did the God of WIT disdain
To mingle with the shining Train.

Her Vot'ries flock'd from various Parts,
And chiefly Youth resign'd their Hearts:
The Old in sparing Numbers press'd,
But aukward Devotees at best.

Now let us range at large, we cry'd,
Thro' all the Gardens' boasted Pride.
Here Jasmines interwove their Flow'rs,
And emulated Eden's Bow'rs:
The Woodbines mix'd in am'rous  Play,
And breath'd their fragrant Lives away:
Here the young Rose its Bloom display'd;
There the Gold Orange form'd a Shade:
While Fountains murmuring to the Song,
Roll'd their translucent Streams along.
Thro' all the aromatic Groves
The faithful Turtles told their Loves:
Larks as they mounted pour'd their Notes,
And Linnets swell'd their rapturous Throats.

We now were order'd to depart,
Reluctance sat on every Heart:
A Porter shew'd a different Door,
Not the fair Portal known before!
The Gates, methought, were open'd wide,
The Crouds descended in a Tide.
But oh!  ye Heav'ns, what vast Surprize
Struck the Advent'rer's frighted Eyes!
A barren Heath before us lay,
And gath'ring Clouds obscur'd the Day:
The Darkness rose in smoky Spires;
The Lightnings flash'd their livid Fires:
Loud Peals of Thunder rent the Air,
While Vengeance chill'd our Hearts with Fear.

Five ruthless Tyrants sway'd the Plain,
And triumph'd o'er the mangled Slain.
Here sat DISTASTE, with sickly Mien,
And more than half devour'd with Spleen:
There stood REMORSE, with Thought opprest,
And Vipers feeding on his Breast:
Then WANT, dejected, pale and thin,
With Bones just starting thro his Skin;
A ghastly Fiend! &mdash; and close behind
DISEASE his aching Head reclin'd!
His everlasting Thirst confess'd
The Fires which rag'd within his Breast:
DEATH clos'd the Train!  the hideous Form
Smil'd unrelenting in the Storm:
When strait a doleful Shriek was heard;
I 'woke &mdash; The Vision disappear'd.

Let not the unexperienc'd Boy
Deny, that PLEASURES will destroy:
Or say, that Dreams are vain and wild,
Like Fairy Tales, to please a Child.
Important Hints the Wise may reap
From Sallies of the Soul in Sleep.
And since there's Meaning in my Dream,
The Moral merits your Esteem.
