Let not the Young my Precepts shun,
One Vision more, and I have done;
Your Poet sung of Love's Delights,
Of Halcyon Days and joyous Nights;
To the gay Fancy lovely Themes;
And fain, I'd hope, they're more than Dreams.
But, if you please, before we part,
I'd speak a Language to your Heart.
We'll talk of LIFE, tho' much, I fear,
Th' ungrateful Tale will wound your Ear.
You raise your sanguine Thoughts too high,
And hardly know the Reason why:
But say, Life's Tree bears golden Fruit,
Some Canker shall corrode the Root;
Some unexpected Storm shall rise;
Or scorching Suns, or chilling Skies;
And (if experienc'd Truths avail)
All your autumnal Hopes shall fail.

Perhaps you'll think I act the same,
As a sly Sharper plays his Game:
You triumph every Deal that's past,
He's sure to triumph at the last,
Who coins, perhaps, some Thousands more
Than twice the Sums you won before.
But I'm a Loser with the rest;
For Life is all a Deal at best:
I play the Cards alike with you,
My Hand is bad, by Trumps are few;
Nor am I Gainer by your Fall;
For Sorrows are the Lot of all.

'Tis Truth (receive it ill or well)
'Tis melancholy Truth I tell.
Why should the Preacher take your Pence,
And smother Truth to flatter Sense?
I'm sure, Physicians have no Merit,
Who kill, thro' Lenity of Spirit.

That Life's a Game, Divines confess,
This says at Cards, and That at Chess:
But if our Views be center'd here,
'Tis all a losing Game I fear.

Sailors, you know, when Wars obtain,
And hostile Vessels croud the Main,
If they discover from afar
A bark as distant as a Star,
Hold the Perspectives to their Eyes,
To learn its Colours, Strength and Size;
And when this Secret once they know,
Make ready to receive the Foe.
Let you and I from Sailors learn
Important Truths of like Concern.

I clos'd the Day, as Custom led,
With Reading, till the Time of Bed;
Where Fancy, at the Midnight Hour,
Again display'd her magic Pow'r.
(For know, that Fancy, like a Spright,
Prefers the silent Scenes of Night.)
She lodg'd me in a neighb'ring Wood,
No matter where the Thicket stood;
The GENIUS of the Place was nigh,
And held two Pictures to my Eye.
The curious Painter had portray'd
LIFE in each just and genuine Shade.
They, who have only known its Dawn,
May think these Lines too deeply drawn;
But riper Years, I fear, will shew,
The wiser Artist paints too true.

One Piece presents a rueful Wild,
Where not a Summer's Sun had smil'd;
The Road with Thorns is cover'd wide,
And GRIEF sits weeping by the Side;
Her Tears with constant Tenor flow,
And form a mournful Lake below;
Whose silent Waters, dark and deep,
Thro' all the gloomy Valley creep.

Passions, that flatter, or that slay,
Are Beasts that fawn, or Birds that prey.
Here VICE assumes the Serpent's Shape;
There FOLLY personates the Ape;
Here AV'RICE gripes with Tygers' Jaws;
While Sons of Mischief, ART and GUILE,
Are Alligators of the Nile.

Ev'n PLEASURE acts a treach'rous Part,
She charms the Sense, but stings the Heart.
And when she gulls us of our Wealth,
Or that superior Pearl, our Health;
Restores us nought, but Pains and Woe,
And drowns us in the LAKE below.

There a commission'd ANGEL stands,
With Desolation in his Hands!
He sends the all-devouring Flame,
And Cities hardly boast a Name.
Or wings the pestilential Blast,
And lo!  ten thousands breathe their last.
He speaks &mdash; obedient Tempests roar,
And guilty Nations are no more:
He speaks &mdash; the Fury DISCORD raves,
And sweeps whole Armies to their Graves:
Or FAMINE lifts her mildew'd Hand,
And HUNGER howls thro' all the Land.

Oh!  what a Wretch is Man, I cry'd,
Expos'd to Death on every Side!
By Evils, which He cannot shun!
Without a thousand Baits to Sin,
A thousand Traytors lodg'd within!
For soon as Vice assaults the Heart,
These Rebels take the Daemon's Part.

I sigh, my aching Bosom bleeds;
When strait a milder Plan succeeds.
The briny Lake, the dreary Shore,
The same as in the Piece before,
But Gleams of Light are here display'd,
To chear the Eye, and gild the Shade.
AFFLICTION speaks a softer Stile,
And DISAPPOINTMENT wears a Smile.
Each thriving Virtue blossoms near,
Their Roots improve by every Tear.

Here PATIENCE, gentle Maid!  is nigh,
To calm the Storm, and wipe the Eye:
HOPE acts the kind Physician's Part,
And warms the solitary Heart;
RELIGION nobler Comforts brings,
Disarms our Griefs, or blunts their Stings;
Points out the Ballance on the Whole,
And HEAV'N rewards the struggling Soul.

But while these Raptures I pursue,
The GENIUS suddenly withdrew.
