Abhorred baleful Fiend!  Hell-born!
Of Lethe and Styx the progeny;
Thee, the good, the wise shall scorn
E'en whilst thy shafts against them fly.
The Panoply of conscious worth,
Avails not bow'd by thee to earth,
The good, the kind, the wise alone
Feel thy rude shafts, and from contempt, and sorrow groan.

Of ev'ry vice the sworn Compear;
Warring 'gainst Heaven, or Earth, or Man.
Fraudful Interest, Envy, Fear,
And coward Cunning mark thy plan.
The Tyger, thirsting after blood,
Tears not his Sire, or Dam for food.
But thou!  Pillow'd on Pity's breast
Dar'st lacerate her heart, and rob it of its rest.

Benevolence, with smiling care,
Walking her sadly pleasing round,
Drying on Misery's cheek the tear,
And pouring balm in every wound;
Her acts close hidden in her heart,
Forgotten till she feels thy dart;
Indignant then, she silence breaks,
Forgets her race divine, and all reproachful speaks.

How shall we shun thee, fiend of hate!
Each various form thou can'st assume,
Lurk near the cot, or throne of state,
Clothe thee with age, or youthful bloom.
Oft thou mov'st a pamper'd Heir,
Partial Affection's hopeless care,
Sinking to earth, thy sire, with shame
Weeps thee unmanly, lost, e'en in thy vices tame.

Lo!  where she sits the love lorn maid.&mdash;
The rose has left her tear stain'd cheek;
In Grief's most lovely form array'd,
With downcast eye resign'd and meek,
Thou, in her faithless lover found,
Gav'st her soft heart the fatal wound;
Patient she waits the only cure
Beneath the sun, death, slow, lingering, wish'd for, sure.

Beneath the garb of Summer friend,
Thou hid'st thy treacherous form;
Guileless an easy faith I lend,
Nor fear from cloudless skies a storm;
Fraught with woe, my swelling breast
Seeks its lov'd friend to ease the smart,
But thou beneath P&mdash;e's form art found
And pour'st a scorpion's venom on the wound.

Thy serpent hiss insults in death,
E'en whilst I sigh my last of breath
Unmov'd thou view'st my yawning grave,
Barbarian yet, refuse'st to save....
