Here, ere the first tear from the weeping rose,
The chearing solar beam has kiss'd away,
How shall this fragment give my limbs repose,
And fit them to pursue the wearying way?

Ah!  once, alas!  these limbs no place of rest
Here on this ruin-scatter'd spot had found;
The steps of Peace here never softly prest,
Or Pleasure wanton'd gaily o'er the ground:

But hopeless Grief, and hollow-ey'd Despair,
In full possession of their horrors dwelt,
And Tyranny, with grim exulting air,
Her iron terrors wide around her dealt.

Here rose the dread Bastile &mdash; at that fell name,
Cold flows the ling'ring life-blood thro' my veins,
A sudden horror spreads thro' all my frame,
And the chill'd Muse can scarce pursue her strains.

Here, as I sit, and fling my eyes around,
And bid warm Fancy wing her utmost flight,
What tragick scenes on this eventful ground,
Unnumber'd, pour upon my aching sight!

E'en now I see, on yonder blood-stain'd stone,
His aching head the captive low recline,
Upward to Heav'n a ling'ring last look thrown,
That speaks submission to the Will Divine.

That seems to rise above the cumb'rous load,
That many a day his woe-worn heart has prest;
That thinks, expectant on Heav'n's bright abode,
At length his soul shall find a place of rest.

Hark!  what a heart-heav'd sigh assails my ear!
'Tis the last groan &mdash; some wretch now yields his breath:
See!  wasted by full many a sorrowing year,
He sinks, alas!  into the arms of Death.

He sinks &mdash; by stern Adversity sore prest,
He dies &mdash; and not a soothing friend is nigh,
To hear the last wish of his bursting breast,
To wipe the moist tear from his closing eye.

From these heart-rending scenes I gladsome turn;
The dread Bastile shall terrify no more;
No wretched captive here again shall mourn,
Or on the gate his sad complaining pour.

'Twas a great deed! &mdash; That Monarch ill must reign,
Must insecurely sit upon his throne,
Whose subjects, bound by Slav'ry's galling chain,
Unheard, beneath her yoke, oppressive groan.

No: &mdash; He, alone, his people's king and friend,
The regal seat must surely safely press,
Who lives, for this important, glorious end&mdash;
To make his subjects happy, and to bless.
