The day departed, Night her seat resumes,
The Moon, pale regent, now begins her reign,
When Contemplation leads me to the tombs,
The peaceful mansions where the dead remain.

There pensive and alone when silence reign,
Add to the sober scene the yew-trees bend
Their waving tops, a solemn pace retain,
Fit time to learn my inevitable end.

Near to the thorn a costly structure rear'd,
The polish'd marble emulates the face
Of him whom it contains for ever laid,
And richly gilded letters tell the race.

What does't avail his deeds on stone unroll'd,
Or sculptur'd fame aloud proclaim his praise?
Can all the ornaments provoke the mould,
And into life the breathless body raise?

Mark round this spot the many rais'd on high,
Vain frail memorials faithless to their trust;
The place will be forgot where now they lie,
Time soon will make them heaps of mould'ring dust.

Few steps below a tufted sod I see,
Without memorial to point out the spot,
His name deny'd a place by Fate's decree,
For while on earth was penury his lot.

What though no storied urn his ashes grace,
Or senseless statues weeping o'er him dead;
What though no friendly Muse proclaims his race,
Or pictur'd Cupids shew their drooping head;

Yet is his memory kept by holier ties,
His tender offsprings images bestead,
With heart-felt sorrows pour their tender cries,
And shed their tender tears on his cold bed.

In many different cells around are laid,
Without memorial but the heighten'd turf;
Here sits some mother &mdash; there some dear lov'd maid&mdash;
And here some infant snatch'd by Fate from earth.

But ah!  who do I see beneath yon shade,
With plaintive murmurs sighing thro' the grove,
Gliding by moon-light there along the glade&mdash;
Oh!  'tis Lucella, slave to hapless love.

Oft when the silver moon the night has cheer'd,
Lucella wand'ring from her peaceful home,
When naught but murmurs of the wind are heard,
To sit and weep on her Philemon's tomb.

Forbear to weep, fond maid, thy tears give o'er,
Philemon heeds thy tears nor hears thy cries;
He much lov'd once, Lucella loves no more,
Nor feels the influence of her sparkling eyes.

What tho' thy frequent tears by sorrow forc'd,
Bedew the urn wherein his ashes rest,
To all these extasies Philemon's lost,
To all the throbbings of thy troubled breast;

With how much joy were once your meetings kept,
How did you think to make the swain your own;
What glow of hope within your bosom crept,
High beat your heart when love's bright seed was sown.

Nor less enraptur'd was the shepherd's breast
Than fair Lucella, knew no other charms,
Fate mock'd your joys, and thus the swain addrest&mdash;
"This hapless night you're doom'd to Death's cold arms."

Ah!  go Lucella, tell the giddy throng,
How vain and fleeting are terrestrial joys;
To trust on earthly happiness how wrong&mdash;
How often Fate our liveliest hopes destroys.
