Soft let me tread this sacred solemn ground,
Where Princes, Heroes, Statesmen silent dwell!
Whose breathing Statues Art had rang'd around,
To bid Remembrance' sorrowing bosom swell.

Pensive I muse, amid' th' immortal throng,
Whom Nature taught to wake the living lyre&mdash;
Warm'd with th' impression of their matchless song,
To Fancy's eye they breathe poetic fire.

This modest stone protects the sacred clay,
Of him whose genius pierc'd the bounds of earth,
Whose mind, creative, felt the heavenly ray,
And gave to worlds unknown poetic birth.

'Twas thine, O!  Milton, to describe the way,
As yet too noble for a mortal's tongue&mdash;
Tho' the mean Earth receiv'd thy sacred clay,
Thy soul enjoys th' Elysium that thou sung.

"The gorgeous Palace, and the cloud-cap't Tower"
Must SHAKESPEARE, yield to Time's resistless might,
But thou shalt live till by Almighty power,
The Globe itself shall sink in endless night.

While the slow stream of all-devouring Time
O'er Arts and Genius pours th' oblivious wave,
In Nature founded, view'd from ev'ry clime,
Th' immortal fabrick all its force shall brave.

Thy Works, O Handel!  chief in powerful Song!
To future times thy matchless worth shall bring;
Tho' mute the voice that charm'd the list'ning throng,
And cold the hand that struck the tremb'ling string.

No cheering sound is heard amidst the gloom,
To soothe thy shade, if wand'ring o'er this place,
Save when the midnight toll along the hallow'd dome
Proclaims to mortals Time's deceitful pace.

Long shall each Briton view with conscious pride
This sacred tomb inscrib'd with NEWTON'S name,
Shall hail him Chief, Philosopher, and Guide,
And spread thro' ages his immortal fame.

While on thy sacred form I gaze, ARGYLE!
Whose words persuasive rul'd the British state,
Whose powerful arm averted from our isle,
The danger threaten'd by impending fate,

Lost for a while in fancy's airy charm;
Thy marble bust seems yet with life replete,
And thus thou stood, for freedom boldly warm,
When truth resistless shook the British state.

The dauntless WOLF, revenging injur'd laws,
Who led triumphant Britons 'gainst the foe,
Seems yet to die in honour's glorious cause,
The weeping vet'ran shares his General's woe.

With rev'rence aw'd, I turn where CHATHAM'S pile,
Attracts with rapture every Patriot's eye,
Whose wisdom rais'd the fame of Britain's isle,
And fix'd his own, which never is to die.

May thy lov'd manes hover o'er thy son,
And pour the precept in his youthful ear,
Tell him the deeds for Britain thou hast done,
For which the column gen'rous Britons rear.

Bid him beware of faction's murmuring band,
Who sow dissension o'er the prosp'rous state,
Bid him not scorn a nation's high command,
The voice of Britons is supremely great.

The regal trophies scatter'd round, to tell
These are the sacred mansions of the great,
Their kingdoms dwindled to a narrow cell,
The blazon'd marble all the pride of state.

If History's stores recall not EDWARD'S worth,
Nor HENRY'S conquests warm thy patriot breast,
Tread not, whoe'er thou art, this sacred earth;
For here entomb'd these honour'd victors rest.

Thy suff'rings, MARY, need no sculptur'd stone
To raise the sigh by imitative art,
To paint thy charms, which once in Britain shone;
They live perpetual in each Briton's heart.

Born in an age, when beauty was a crime,
Thy form might e'en a tyrant's rage disarm;
But stern thy subjects as their rugged clime,
And cold each heart to every female charm.

While fame records ELIZA'S matchless name,
And pays the tribute due to Royal worth,
How learning foster'd first her foes o'ercame,
And arts and arms refulgent then shone forth.

Yet must she speak of one whose callous heart
Could hear unmov'd MARIA'S earnest prayer,
Could scorn the ties which friendship should impart,
And stab the wretch that, trembling, sought her care.
