Thou vulgar genius!  whose rude breath inspires
Our priests, our farmers, schoolmasters and 'squires;
Whose pow'r extends o'er all th' unlettered race
From rogues in rags to candidates in lace:
If drinking deep at thy unhallow'd spring,
I taught the beer-house with loud strains to ring;
And too forgetful of the golden age,
Made nymphs and swains in bloody fight engage;
Oh!  still indulgent to my pray'r incline,
And as the WAKE to make the WEDDING shine!

Soon as the sun display'd his chearful beams,
And rous'd young lovers from their idle dreams,
(When wanton milk-maids blest the smiling morn,
And vig'rous hinds cut down the golden corn)
Jane's kindred tribes flock'd in from ev'ry side;
Some prais'd the beer, and some the blooming bride:
All fell to work:  knives, cleavers, hatchets rung:
The boiler foam'd:  the kettles, pots were hung;
While crackling flames a weighty chine embrown'd,
And winds diffus'd the grateful smoak around.
Faster than news-boys scour along the Strand,
When Wagstaffe's papers fly from hand to hand,
The neigh'bring peasants trotted to the feast:
Our barber first, a most facetious guest;
The parish clerk, whose paunch is always full;
Left handed Paul, who broke the proctor's scull;
The miller, idle on St. Martin's day;
The smith, whose face is scratch'd in ev'ry fray;
The constable, so crooked and so tall
Like Pisa's tow'r he threatens still to fall;
The snuffing groom, whose purple nose was wry'd;
The valiant cobler, oft' in battle try'd;
Sly Ned, well skill'd the speckled trout to snare;
And Bob, the terror of each neighb'ring hare;
And limping Luke, and Barnaby the strong,
This fam'd for wrestling, that renown'd for song.
With these their wives, their sisters, daughters came:
Black Moll and Kate, already known to fame;
Nell, oft' entangled in her husband's hair;
Fat Pegg, who ne'er came sober from a fair;
The cook-maid glorious in her best array,
Whose easy heart became a footman's prey;
Sukey, chaste nymph that shunn'd the 'squire's embrace;
The coachman's lady with a brandy face;
Good-natur'd Ann, who from her lover stray'd;
The mantua-maker, an undoubted maid;
Old Prudence, envious of each neighbour's bliss,
And buxom Joan, that ne'er refused a kiss.
Then all the gentry thunder'd to the gate:
The 'squire, the farmer, and the farmer's mate:
Young widow Walsh, whose heart is fix'd on Heav'n;
The sweet miss Bab, a child of twenty-seven;
And master Sam, that fav'rite of the nine,
And last the priest, a blust'ring, bold divine.
With hunger fierce at ev'ry guest he frown'd,
And thrice his rev'rence stamp'd upon the ground:
(So conjurers brib'd by some despairing maid
Call up their spirits from th' infernal shade)
Th' impatient croud fell back on either side,
And strait appear'd the bridegroom and the bride.
Led by her sire the bashful beauty came,
Her features glowing with a decent flame.
To whom the priest:  (but first his voice to clear
He drain'd a goblet of the nut-brown beer)
"Approach, thou gentlest of thy sex!  and prove
The lasting joys that wait on guiltless love.
True to thy vows what toils didst thou sustain
Far from thy kindred and despairing swain!
Now those sad days of servitude are o'er&mdash;
Thy pray'rs were heard, and thou shalt grieve no more.
With rev'rence due receive the bridal ring,
And know that wedlock is a sacred thing.
This all the patriarchs, prophets, kings confest:
Ev'n Christ himself a nuptial banquet blest:
The limpid water lucious wine became&mdash;
(Ah!  would to Heav'n that priests could do the same!)
Fair as thou art affect no lawless sway,
For Peter says that females should obey:
And thus St. Paul his sentiments display'd:
'Woman for man, as man for God, was made.'
Ah!  then, my child, by sage advice be led
At home, abroad, at table and in bed.
As a fair face ne'er sanctifies a crime,
Make thine affections with thy duty chime.
For idle whims neglect no worldly care,
Yet some fond moments for thy husband spare:
Nor grudge to pay the matrimonial debt,
An easy task which few young wives forget.
Heav'n bless thy mother with eternal rest,
Who ne'er sat grouling at a stranger guest.
Do thou, like her, an honest fame acquire;
Let needy trav'lers share thy chearful fire;
Regale the clergy with a plenteous feast,
And have a Christ'ning once a year at least."
He said, and clos'd the rites.  Tim clasp'd his bride:
The belles with envy turn'd their heads aside;
But soon a diff'rent scene engaged their eyes;
For lo!  fat geese, ducks, turkies, tongues and pyes,
And rumps and sirloins made the table groan,
In number equall'd by Kildare's alone.
Close by the farmer's dame the bride was fix'd:
What lively colours on her cheek were mix'd!
Not G&mdash;an&mdash;g, once of English peers the toast,
Nor Leinster's dutchess purer red could boast.
The priest, whose jaw-bone, never known to fail,
Wou'd make the stoutest philistine grow pale,
First blest the meat; then, like a true divine,
With fury fasten'd on a smoaking chine.
Ne'er was a feast so silently devour'd,
And beer in vain from foaming pales was pour'd:
But when the punch surpris'd them after grace,
When mounting spirits blaz'd in ev'ry face,
The priest, the pedant, all began to roar,
And those had wit that wanted it before.
Then Munster Jack, then Tom began to sound,
And rustling silks and poplins swept the ground.
Gods!  what a scene the midnight hour display'd?
The farmer drench'd his daughter's new brocade:
With living carcases the floor was spread:
A broken jugg sustain'd the barber's head.
Black Moll and Winifred, the coachman's wife,
Tugg'd at each other's locks in murd'rous strife.
The cook-maid snorted in an easy chair,
Her arms extended and her bosom bare:
And Kate, by witchcraft or by wind opprest,
(O may no straggler interrupt her rest!)
Slept on the threshold; while, secure from harms,
The bride lay panting in her shepherd's arms.
