Now mew'd in chair, the female Rakes unknown,
Whilst Bucks more hardy swagger in the sun;
The honest tradesmen to their labours trudge,
And watchmen cease to sleep on Essex-bridge.
Clean dressed Lactea, with her whey appears,
She shrilly cries &mdash; when b&mdash;h salute her ears&mdash;
Know I'm Black Moll, who at the markets ply,
I've waited here, to catch you passing by;
Restore my Scobby, in a rage she said,
Or not a stitch of cap shall clothe your head.
The nymph, afrighted, as she heard her rail,
Stoop'd down, and wisely first, secured the pail;
And then (she cries) I'm ready for to prove,
If scratching does it, who is most in love.
But see, the hackney coachmen smoke the fray,
And Cinderella riddles on the Quay;
Let her decide who loves the shoe-boy best,
For love has been no stranger to her breast.

CINDERELLA.
Be quick &mdash; the carts will take the dirt away;
I'll lose my cinders if too long you stay.

LACTEA.
On Sunday to the outlets I repair,
And with new-milk and brandy treat my dear;
Then, at an ord'nary I'm sure to stop,
He likes pork griskins, or a mutton chop;
And what with ale, and whiskey given away,
I starve the week &mdash; for that one happy day:
Besides he breakfasts on my snowy curds&mdash;
And only loves me &mdash; if I b'lieve his words.

MOLL.
Oft with my basket full of choicest beef,
I own for him, I gladly play'd the thief;
I've turn'd a corner, and got clearly off:
In some dark entry he wou'd cut a steak,
And then I'd run &mdash; you'd think my heart must break.
In Bridewell too, my aid I'd not refuse,
(The youth has other trades than cleaning shoes;)
His hand, unlucky, in a fob was found,
They duck'd the boy, alas!  I thought he'd drown'd&mdash;
At last, committed for the like offence,
I shar'd his prison &mdash; and I gave my pence:&mdash;
Now give your judgment, for I'm sure you'll own
Scobby is mine, &mdash; and loves his Moll alone.

CINDERELLA.
What do I hear!  let's to yon gin-ship go;
The name you've mention'd fills my heart with woe!
Forbear your squabbles &mdash; Scobby is a bite,
He's false to all &mdash; and snores by me at night.
