The sober citizens to town repair,
Pleas'd by their walk, and breathing country air;
Whilst crouds impatient in the play-house sit,
Stunn'd by the cat-calls, mixt with gall'ry wit.
Now Patch the cobler, creeps from garret out,
To meet a comrade o'er a pot of stout;
The valliant Muzzle, fam'd for learned pate,
To mend your bellow &mdash; or reform the state:
Through lanes to tap-house cautiously they wind,
(No tatter'd poet oft'ner look'd behind)
Then safe in box &mdash; by humming beer inspir'd,
Thus the great Muzzle liberty admir'd!

MUZZLE.
In London streets I shortly will attend,
And cry "fair maids, have you old pots to mend?"
Who will starve here?  when there you're sure to thrive&mdash;
You'll eat roast beef, for bawling Forty Five:
Of pow'rful secrets I am sure it treats;
Mark how men stop, where it is chalk'd on gates!

PATCH.
I grant they do &mdash; and think it not amiss
That cleanly chaps should wash it out with p&mdash;ss.

MUZZLE.
How you prophane! &mdash; But let me tell you, Patch,
Of late we patriots find you're on the catch&mdash;
The wicked courtiers bargain with you, either
To rob you of your conscience, or your leather.
Forsake this vile corrupted town, and go
To where no duke dare give you the first blow,
Or the crown-office well rewards your pains;
'Tis best be saucy there, to bring in gains&mdash;
And, tho' a lord should meet your empty cart,
You'll keep the road &mdash; and for him let a f&mdash;t.

PATCH.
The country party's always my delight;
I love true patriots &mdash; but I hate a bite&mdash;
Some hold out long, you'd swear they're in a huff:
And why? &mdash; because they're not brib'd high enough&mdash;

MUZZLE.
You lye, you rascal! &mdash; I know who you mean,
Our great protector, it is very plain&mdash;
Strip, strip to box me &mdash; let a ring be made,
Friends see fair play &mdash; I hate the cobling trade&mdash;

PATCH.
My stomach wambles as his words I hear,
I must have brandy, or I'll spue the beer.
And now, good neighbours, whilst I lick this rap,
Keep my leather apr'n, and my new red cap;
I care not much about the ragged clothes,
But have an eye, for those are well made shoes.

MUZZLE.
Come on you coward, for too long you stay&mdash;
Hah!  there's Long Bess &mdash; that I was safe away.

BESS.
I'm starv'd at home &mdash; and shall you guzzle ale?
Fitter to buy our hungry children meal.
There, take that kick, and hurry on before&mdash;
I'll trounce your hide, when I have lock'd the door.

CONSTABLE.
Cobler, I seize you at the baker's suit;
You may in jail on liberty dispute.
