'Tis Hallow'd Eve &mdash; and from their works retire
The miller's servants, to the kitchen fire;
NORA and JUGGY (cleanly maids are they)
Had milk'd the cows, and swept the dirt away&mdash;
Then carry'd roasted apples from the grate,
Wash'd them in ale, and sugar'd well the treat,
When from a corner DEB'RAH STRADDLE run&mdash;

DEBORAH.
Here, scrape this nutmeg, or we're all undone!
For cholic pains within the guts will come,
And then, those ivy leaves I've steep'd so green,
All pinch'd and bruis'd, will in the morn be seen;
Sure signs of death &mdash; tho' now I hope my leaf
(Mark'd with red worsted) in the pan is safe.
But see, the moon shines bright on yonder hill,
Girls seek the garden, where the cabbage grow,
There blindfold pull &mdash; your lovers' shapes to know;
Each will be married to a hunch-back lord.
Since it is night &mdash; I swear the men shall stay;
Mischief may happen if they come that way.

NORA.
Now we're alone &mdash; the loaders whom we've left,
With scorching love, our youthful hearts have cleft;
JUGG burns for SIM, and I with HODGE am smit,
Alas!  I fear you'll see me lose my wit!
Ay &mdash; this day week, 'twas coming from the fair,
He hawl'd me so &mdash; my apron got a tear;
I vow'd &mdash; again if he but touch'd the tape,
I'd to the justice for to swear a rape&mdash;
Some panting gossips just went on before,
And I must speak &mdash; or they would call me w&mdash;re:
I mention'd marriage &mdash; but he's distant since,
Making the gallows always his pretence.

JUGGY.
Lover's oft quarrel, therefore don't repine,
Your case is nothing near so bad as mine.
Young SIM, the tall fat lad that we left there,
With the broad shoulders, and the flaxen hair,
His huge great leg, at wrestling always wins,
Whilst all the mill-boys tremble for their shins:
True, he can't dance, or make a handsome scrape,
And that his stomach's always on the gape&mdash;
Yet manly like, he'll hoist you up a sack,
Such weight, I'm sure, wou'd break another's back:
The leaders envy his superior parts,
Whilst all the girls (like me) must lose their hearts.
How shall I speak!  not all my charms can move,
A kiss or towzing from my frozen love!
I told my passion once behind these trees,
He forc'd a laugh &mdash; and blushing call'd for cheese&mdash;
O!  think, good DEB, as 'tis the only night,
Of pow'rful spells to settle matters right.

DEBORAH.
Beshrew me!  but I thought they'd follow there,
I've watch'd the door, and not a soul come near.
There is a charm shall fire every clunch,
(First club your testers for a bowl of punch,)
Leave them with me &mdash; then hang your smocks on chairs,
Go quick to bed, but do not think of pray'rs:
Be sure in quiet all the time you lie,
Whilst you see sprights, like true-loves passing by.
Now storms arise &mdash; they tremble every limb;
The door flies open &mdash; in comes HODGE and SIM.

HODGE.
With my next wages, in a forthnight due,
I'd have bought licence, and a ring for you:
We're cheaper off &mdash; forbear to make a fuss!
For DEB'RAH says you've turn'd the shifts on us.
