What savage throng approaches near,
Whose frantic yells assail the ear?
What horrid phantom stalks in view?
Dire Goddess of the desp'rate crew.
Weapons imbru'd in blood she bears,
And eager drinks the wretches tears;
Rage, Vice, and Folly in her train,
Shout forth the praises of her reign;
Proclaim her for their Deity,
And call the Hell-born Fury &mdash; Liberty.

Awhile the Nymph who truly bears
That name, a friend to human kind,
Laments their crimes with pitying tears,
And sadly views their madness unconfin'd.

For She delights from wrong to save
Oppression's sworn and constant foe;
Inspires with honest zeal, the brave,
To aim at Guilt the fatal blow.

But never can her vot'rys join,
With giddy Faction's murderous band;
To aid black Treason's foul design,
And desolate a fruitful land.

To Heav'n-born Charity too near allied,
To white-rob'd Mercy, spotless Truth a friend;
Aghast with horror now she turns aside
From the dire ills created by a Fiend
Who dares her name assume, to scourge mankind,
To stay the guiltless and mislead the blind.

Thy blood, fair Lambelle!  beauteous victim!  calls
For vengeance on each furious miscreant's head,
See the fell engine lifted high &mdash; it falls&mdash;
And gallant Monchy joins th' unnumber'd dead.

Ah!  hapless Louis, though thy wretched fate
Is yet protracted by the savage band;
A thousand horrors constant round thee wait;
Perhaps yet doom'd to bleed beneath a Traitor's hand.

Nor is't enough that thou should'st feel alone,
Of slavery, th' insulting galling chain;
The unhappy Queen!  late partner of thy throne,
Is doom'd to share thy danger, and thy pain.

She too, whose virtue made thy griefs her own,
Thy prison's gloom still willing to partake;
In vain her sighs, a Brother's fate bemoan,
In vain her tears, too weak thy chains to break.

You, Royal infants!  early taught to feel,
The proud controul of insolence in power;
Lamenting we, your youth immur'd bewail,
For you we supplicate the happier hour;
Oh!  may it soon arrive to set you free,
Poor, high-born Children of Adversity.
