Well may'st thou moan (afflicted Peggy said)
A brother, Patty, gone, for ever gone;
The goodliest youth that ever wooed a maid,
That ever laid his lambs along the lawn.

Indeed, my love, this wond'rous woe appears
No partial fondness in my friend and me,
For ev'ry eye's brimful of talking tears,
Each goodman Shepherd weeps as well as we.

But now I saw the dear remains convey'd,
'Neath yonder yew as all his fathers slept,
The sexton sigh'd as stooping o'er his spade,
And stop'd the burial while the Vicar wept.

Ah!  luckless lad, methinks I see him still,
In blythsome sort, as at the happy hour,
When first he met poor Peggy at the mill,
And left his sack to carry home her flour.

PATTY.
Nay all can witness Robin was endu'd
With ev'ry grace a sister could desire,
The kindest soul!  if Patty bak'd or brew'd,
He'd snatch the furze and bavins for her fire.

How oft when milking has he left his team,
To watch the oven lest my bread should burn;
Oft from my pans has nicely skim'd my cream,
And taught me ev'ry spell to charm the churn.

But this day week, 'tis present to my view,
Alas, to think how soon the best may die,
He shell'd my beans, and cut the gammon too,
And pick'd my goosberies to make the pie.

PEGGY.
Ah, why did Robin fairly win my heart
With civil speeches, t'other market-day!
Why kindly kiss my lips in friendly part,
And bear my eggs and butter all the way.

PATTY.
This camblet boddice, fit for Sunday wear,
He gave without or wages or reward;
And brought the scarlet breastknot from the fair,
To please his Patty of his own accord.

PEGGY.
There sleep his bones in yonder tufted grave,
Who once excell'd in wrestling and the race;
Who once at church could sweetly chaunt a stave,
And sung the Early Horn, and Chevy Chace.

PATTY.
Alas, his tongue must rest for ever still,
Whose merry joke did all our pastime make;
His cudgel now has lost its master's skill,
So wont to win the triumph at the wake.

But now we'll part:  I fear the day grows late,
And meet to-morrow in the shady lane;
And weep to think of Robin's wretched fate,
Sum all his virtues up and weep again.
