Tho' darkness reigns &mdash; stumbling the neighbours go,
On to the village, where the candles glow;
The dogs and geese, their watchful vigils keep,
And howls of women join to banish sleep.
Here youths and maids, and grandames strew the floor,
Whilst PITCHERINA'S stretch'd on houshold door;
Quick off the hinge their trusty guard they take,
No matter how &mdash; all enter to a wake:
The young to tomp, and crack the funny joke,
But nearer death, the old &mdash; to drink and smoke.

WHISTKENETT.
Oh!  ho!  Oh!  ho! &mdash; Why should I see the day,
To have you buried in the dirty clay?
No better gossip could a body get,
She always lov'd to have her whistle wet&mdash;
No better spinster in the North was found,
Say I speak truth &mdash; you whiskey houses round?
An honest soul as any one could meet,
At Lammas last she pledg'd her winding-sheet:
Her bees they dy'd &mdash; and in that meal-chest there,
The death watch tick'd &mdash; which fill'd me full of fear;
And, on my conscience (if I trust my sight)
Thro' our potatoes run her fetch in white.

THADY.
Alack-a-day!  That THADY e'er was born,
Or had he dy'd with PITCHY in the corn,
When caught together in the act of shame&mdash;
Our bastard then would never rue the same.
But how they laugh? &mdash; So MADGY wipe your eyes,
The 'Squire in gold's as bad as me in frize:
And know my girl, there's not an O, or Mac,
To whom your mother ever turn'd her back;
In a right line from Connaught things was she,
I mean the nurses of the family.

CICILY.
Ah!  PITCHERINA, why would you forsake
Your sister CICILY? &mdash; sure my heart will break!
See the seven lights upon the board are laid,
For pipes, tobacco, &mdash; all the score is paid;
And with what care did I your limbs dispose,
E're cold I wash'd you &mdash; and I pinch'd your nose&mdash;
With rosemary and mint the corps was dressed,
I cautious left the salt upon your breast.
Its morn &mdash; they'll shout, and bear you to the grave,
Look up &mdash; and of poor CIC'LY take your leave.

PITCHERINA.
O CIS!  of yonder bottle give a sup&mdash;
And as they run &mdash; she gently rises up.
