Now seated on a promontory's steep,
To catch the fragrance of the winnowing wind,
The eye delighted takes a boundless sweep,
And feeds with nature's charms th' insatiate mind.

The clouds revolving in their airy sphere,
With whose soft tints no tint of Art can vie,
To the rapt sight in checquer'd folds appear,
Like marble rocks suspended from the sky.

The Tame, slow winding in its devious way,
Glides emblematic of the life of man;
And calm, or ruffled, hastens ev'ry day
To end precisely where it first began.

Yon hoary pile, with mantling ivy crown'd,
Indented deeply with the tooth of time,
Shews, whilst it flings a gloomy grandeur round,
Full many a vestige of the true sublime.

Rear'd on a rugged rock, its tow'ring walls
From the barb'd arrow once were wont to screen;
Now round them night's unsocial herald squalls,
And many a hero's spectre stalks unseen.

Some lonely wight, whilst idly rambling round
The crumbling ruins on the craggy hill,
Full many a mould'ring relick may have found,
That pos'd the deep-read antiquarian's skill.

Here Royalty, in faction's early day,
Awhile was shrouded from the public view;
And the rapt Poet fram'd his sweetest lay
To laughing Comus and his sprightly crew.

There, oft unseen, at eventide he stray'd,
And inspiration's holy fervor caught;
And fancied forms of fairy tribes pourtray'd
In all the splendour of poetic thought.

There, too, a Bard of bold satyric vein,
And the rich hoard of comic wit possest,
To curb fanatics wove the motley strain,
And urg'd successfully the biting jest.

But niggard penury obscur'd his days,
From life's first dawning to its last sad stage;
Yet pleas'd, to antedate posthumous praise,
He sweetly warbled to a listless age.

Ah me!  that men of genius and of worth,
Watch'd by the Muses at their natal hour,
Should find, whilst wand'ring o'er their native earth,
Contempt and poverty their only dow'r!

Yet, tho' but few those suff'rings may regard,
Which well might cause the feeling heart to bleed,
If ever merit meets a just reward,
The man of genius will be blest indeed!
