How great &mdash; how grand &mdash; the astronomic Sage
Who measureth the altitude of stars!
How great the Poet, whose seraphic page,
Nor rage of kings, nor time, nor envy mars!
Monarchs how great, thron'd on triumphal cars!
But greater far, whoever, whate'er he be,
The brave, good man!  Exempted from all fears,
Whether of time or of eternity,
He, like a green isle, blossoms in a stormy sea.

Such was our Knight; who, resolutely good,
The narrow road of Righteousness pursued,
Dreadless what dangers in his way might stand,
Pure was his soul, resistless was his hand.
Now sad, amid a shady solitude,
On the green margin of a prattling flood,
Rinaldo paus'd &mdash; as there forlorn he stood,
The swell of distant melody he heard;
Anon, a golden chariot appear'd,
Proudly advancing, drawn by peacocks fair,
With gorgeous plumery, dancing in the air.
On that bright chariot, in imperial state,
The queen of Oberon, fair Titania, sate;
On downy cushion, rich with gold and green,
Aloft she sat, like love's celestial queen,
When, thro' the skies, she drives her glowing car,
And gazing gods adore her from afar.

Around Titania, youths and damsels throng,
Warbling, will, dulcet breath, a magic song,
Whose mazy tide intoxicates the soul&mdash;
From neighbouring rocks a thousand echoes roll
The refluent sounds, and fondly multiply,
With busy tongues, th' angelic harmony.

In robes of green, fresh youths the concert led,
Measuring, the while, with nice, emphatic tread
Of tinkling sandals, the melodious sound
Of smitten timbrels; some, with myrtles crown'd,
Pour the smooth current of sweet melody,
Thro' ivory tubes; some blow the bugle free,
And some, at happy intervals, around,
With trumps sonorous swell the tide of sound;
Some, bending raptur'd o'er their golden lyres,
With cunning fingers fret the tuneful wires;
With rosy lips, some press the syren shell,
And, thro' its crimson labyrinths, impel
Mellifluous breath, with artful sink and swell.
Some blow the mellow, melancholy horn,
Which, save the Knight, no man of woman born,
E'er heard and fell not senseless to the ground,
With viewless fetters of enchantment bound.
The nodding trees its magic influence own,
And, spell-struck, drop their golden clusters down;
The forests quaver, and elysian bow'rs,
With pleasing tremors shed their fragrant flow'rs.
An awful silence, winds and waters keep;
And spell-chain'd brooks, that bound from steep to steep,
On jutting rocks, delay their headlong leap.
The cross alone, the holy cross disarms
The Fairy fiends, and baffles all their charms.

Titania's car now reach'd the shady wood,
Where list'ning, gazing, young Rinaldo stood.
She views the hero with unsteady eyes,
Her breast pants wildly and her blushes rise.
Fall'n is her pride, her pomp forgotten quite,
She seems a trembling suppliant to the Knight;
For ah!  when first the godlike youth she view'd,
Resistless love her haughty soul subdued&mdash;
Her winged team she stay'd, with silken rein,
Then wav'd her sceptre o'er the choral train;
The train evanish'd, and the Fairy queen
Stepp'd from her car, with melancholy mien.
The courtly hero bow'd his stately head,
With modest awe, as thus Titania said&mdash;
"Majestic stranger!  whatsoe'er your name,
Where'er you go, or whencesoe'er you came&mdash;
Alas, the cause, that led your daring feet,
To this forbidden, sanctified retreat!
Know, luckless Knight!  when your invasion bold,
Of Fairy Land, to Oberon first was told,
He swore, and all the host of Fairies swore,
You ne'er should see your home, your country more.
The king, since then, has sought, by force and guile:
To work your ruin &mdash; I alone, the while,
With secret tears your dang'rous state bewail'd,
And smil'd, in secret, when his efforts fail'd.
I saw his hosts encompass you around
With hostile spears; but soon, delighted, found
Your life was shielded by superior charms,
That mock'd their spells and unavailing arms.
Ev'n diamond lances, at your bosom thrown,
Melted and fell, like glitt'ring dew-drops, down.
When spells nor arms against your life prevail'd,
With tempting lures your virtue they assail'd;
They offer'd death, in banquets rich and rare,
Envenom'd wines and damsels lewd and fair.
All sweet temptations in your way they cast,
But (doubtless warn'd) thro' all you safely pass'd&mdash;
O!  still beware; for deadly is that foe
Who can behold you and continue so.
Know, even I (unhappy I!) am sent,
By Oberon, your life to circumvent,
By other wile &mdash; O, sightless policy!
To trust, with woman, such an embassy,
To such a fair and manly enemy!
Those eyes alone can female hosts subdue,
And make them foes to all the world but you.
Dear youth!  in me behold the fairy queen!
Behold her tears &mdash; for you &mdash; for you they stream&mdash;
Do not these tears at least my pity prove?
And is not pity evidence of love?
O, yes!  I love you &mdash; will your life defend:
Trust me &mdash; a lover is the surest friend.
Hope not your captive lady to regain;
To seek the fair, is toil and peril vain;
Perhaps, transform'd, she lies on yonder strand.
A glitt'ring pebble or a grain of sand!
Nought but revenge upon our common foe,
Revenge on Oberon is left us now.
T' avenge your injury and your loss redeem;
Retaliate boldly and bear off his queen.
O!  be advis'd &mdash; be Oberon to me,
And I your happy Crystaline will be&mdash;
And if my wealth, my counsel, or my art,
Can aid to you, angelic youth, impart,
You shall not perish &mdash; sooner shall this hand,
Tho' here I reign, blot out this radiant land&mdash;
Yon golden arch, hill-propp'd, shall sooner fall;
Sooner I'll crush yon interposing wall,
Let in the sea, and whelm in ruin all!"&mdash;
Thus having said, with melancholy air,
She veil'd her fair face with her golden hair,
And hid her tears &mdash; but sighs and sobs reveal'd
The am'rous sorrows that her locks conceal'd.
Around his neck her snow-white arms she flung.
And fondly, sadly, on the hero hung.
Then down they sat, beneath a myrtle shade,
Where clustering flow'rs a fragrant cushion made;
Warbled the birds; the silver stream slid by,
Sweet to the ear, and pleasant to the eye;
While o'er their heads the forest-stirring breeze,
Shook flow'rs and fragance from the bloomy trees.
'Twas there Rinaldo to Titania told
His wondrous tale &mdash; the theft of Oberon bold&mdash;
The wizard-lyre &mdash; the necromancer old.
There he describ'd his dangerous descent
To Fairy Land; his desperate intent,
From Oberon's hand to free he captive fair,&mdash;
Then rose, and frowning, shook his vengeful spear.

Scarce had the Knight declarr'd his plighted love,
And sworn still true, in weal or wo, to prove,
When disappointment, like a sudden storm,
That doth the sea's unwrinkled lace deform,
Rush'd on her soul &mdash; her love with scorn repaid!
Her beauty slighted, for a mortal maid
By Oberon slighted, and Rinaldo too!
What should a queen so scorn'd and injured do?
Contending passions boil along her veins;
Now love, now scorn, now furious anger reigns:
She curses, blesses, sues, and now commands,&mdash;
Bids him begone, yet stays him with her hands;
Embraces him, then pushes him away,
Chides him for staying, and then bids him stay.
The Knight a stern civility maintain'd,
And, like a rock, mid tossing waves, remain'd.
But soon the hope arose, that she might aid
To free from Oberon, the rival maid;
Then thus, with kinder, gentler voice he spoke,
And on her cast a sympathetic look:&mdash;
"O lovely queen of lovely Faery,
Tho' guiltless of the crime of loving thee;
Yet, sad experience of thy wretched state
Hath taught me pity, and I mourn thy fate.
Hard is that heart which pity cannot move,
For the sad victim of a hopeless love!
If Pity's tears, fair Queen, can cure or aid
The wounds that I have innocently made,
Behold how freely my o'erflowing eyes,
For thee, the sweet restorative supplies!"
"Ah, no!" she cried "the tears of pity prove
A rankling poison to the wounds of love.
Pity is insult, since it but implies
That I am low, not lovely in your eyes;
May I too lovely, and too powerful prove,
To need your pity or to lack your love!
Love is for love the best, the only cure,
O!  grant me love, and I shall ask no more!
Will diamonds buy it?  Will the high-priz'd gold?
Will kingdoms buy, or can your love be sold?
Behold!  at hand four glittering hills appear&mdash;
Enchanting sight! &mdash; more precious still than fair;
The one is gold, and one is silver white,
And one is pearl, and one is diamond bright&mdash;
See, in the midst, a dazzling throne arise!
Would you have all?  your love is all the price.
Are these too small Rinaldo's love to buy?
Then let his mercy what remains supply,
For ah!  dear Knight, for you, for you I die!"
Thus spake the queen, and lo!  four hills appear&mdash;
Enchanting sight! &mdash; but richer still than fair.
And one was pearl and one was silver white,
And one was gold, and one was diamond bright.
High in the midst arose a dazzling throne,
Built all of emerald and of diamond stone,
With gold and purple canopy o'erspread,
Fair as the curtains of Aurora's bed.

The Knight, unmov'd, survey'd each glittering pile,
Then firmly answer'd, with disdainful smile&mdash;
"Of love, no more!  true love was never sold,
'Twere sacrilege to barter love for gold;
For love is sacred &mdash; 'tis a gift of heav'n,
And only precious when 'tis freely giv'n;
Love sold is base, and counterfeit as hell,
And they deceivers who would buy or sell.
To Mercy does Titania appeal?
She wounds not one, another one to heal.
To comfort thee must Crystalina die?
Mercy to thee, to her is cruelty!
Then blame not me, but yield to mighty fate,
Nor add new woes, to thy too woful state.
I see, amid the lab'rinth of thy woes,
A path that leads to safety and repose.
Is not the hapless Virgin, whom I seek,
Titania's rival? &mdash; will not she &mdash; O, speak!
Will not Titania aid a friendly Knight,
To bear that rival from her husband's sight?
Or shall I go? &mdash; desert fore'er thy charms,
And leave that rival in thy husband's arms?"

He ceas'd &mdash; and long the lovely queen remain'd,
In sad perplexity, and tears unfeign'd
From her blue eyes in piteous torrents rain'd.
Thrice, sobbing deep, to answer she essay'd,
But thrice in vain, ere thus, she falt'ring said:&mdash;

"Ah!  wretched Queen!  and must I then endure
The loss of thee, my Oberon to secure?
Must I relinquish my Rinaldo's charms,
And give my rival to my darling's arms?
Alas!  I must; since, doubtless, to refuse,
Is both thyself and Oberon to lose.
O!  then accept my melancholy aid,
And haste to seek that enviable maid.
Why, why wast thou not Oberon?  or why
Thy happy Crystalina was not I?"
Thus having said, reclining on the Knight,
Disconsolate, she sought her chariot bright.
The Peacocks vanish'd, as the pair drew near,
And in their places stood two harness'd deer.
They mount the car &mdash; the nimble coursers start&mdash;
O'er flow'ry plains, thro' parting groves they dart;
And soon they reach the mountains which surround,
Like tow'ry ramparts, the Elysian ground.
And now Titania check'd her bounding team,
And her bright chariot vanish'd, like a gleam
Of sun in tempest, or an empty dream:
The coursers sprang into the neighb'ring wood,
And side by side the queen and hero stood.
Then thus Titania to Rinaldo said&mdash;
"Where yon tall forest casts a gloomy shade,
Around the base of yon stupendous steep,
A cavern yawns, capacious, dark, and deep;
Far in that cavern Oberon's palace lies,
And there, perhaps, thy Crystalina sighs;
And there the King convenes his dark Divan,
New schemes of death against thy life to plan.
But mark!  wouldst thou, O Knight!  return again,
Speak not, but silent as the grave remain;
Speak not, till first the gay-green lake be pass'd,
The dragon conquer'd, and the maid embrac'd.
A single word the mighty spell will break,
By which all stands &mdash; this mystic trifle take,
This glitt'ring shell, and cast it in the lake&mdash;
Adieu!  Adieu!" &mdash; Thus spake the Fairy Queen,
And gave the shell with melancholy mein.
Rinaldo quickly pierc'd the gloomy wood,
And by the cavern's dismal entrance stood;
He search'd his bosom and his cross was there,
He made secure his buckler and his spear,
And breath'd to heav'n a fervent, silent pray'r.
Down the dark cave with forward spear he strode,
Where glow-worm tapers lighted up his road.
As down the steep his awful way he took,
His heavy tread the sounding cavern shook.
Now right, now left &mdash; now up, now down he goes&mdash;
And on his pathway still the glow-worm glows.
As he strides by, the startled raven croaks,
His wings hoarse-rustling mid the gloomy rocks,
And meteor-fiends across his pathway dire
Dart frightfully and trail their bickering fire!
At length, before him, dismal sounds arise&mdash;
Sword-clash, chain-clank, and groans, and thrilling cries.
But on he march'd, defying what he hear'd,
Till lo!  a wall of solid fire appear'd
Athwart the cave, and cast a baleful light
On many a horrid, many a ghastly sight!
Infernal shapes danc'd on that fiery wall,
And rocks above seem'd tott'ring to their fall.
Beyond that burning wall, Rinaldo view'd
An iron gate, by which a Giant stood.
With hasty steps, the desp'rate Knight drew near,
And smote the fierce flames with his magic spear;
The wall gave way, and thro' the passage dread,
Rinaldo march'd with slow and cautious tread:
But lo!  the Giant huge, to meet him came!&mdash;
Clad all in iron was his tow'ring frame;
His shield, uplifted, seem'd a sable cloud,
His spear seem'd lightning, and he cried aloud&mdash;
"Stand, daring Knight!  what passport dost thou bring,
What guardian token from the fairy King?
Or hast thou dar'd, unlicens'd, to explore
These secret realms, where man ne'er trod before?
Stand and reply!"  Th' intrepid Knight drew near,
With lion aspect and protended spear;
With all his strength he hurl'd upon the foe
A well-directed and resistless blow.
His spear thro' shield and iron breastplate pierc'd,
And gory fountains from the Giant burst.
The grim-fac'd fiend, with rage and terror, roar'd,
And added force to his descending sword&mdash;
His sword, whose stormy sweep had raz'd a tow'r,
Fell on the hero's buckler, with the pow'r
And noise of thunder &mdash; but in vain it fell,
Though strongly wielded and directed well.
Rinaldo's shield th' impetuous shock sustain'd,
And still undinted and unhurt remain'd.
Not so the sword of his infernal foe&mdash;
Like ice, 'twas shiver'd by the magic blow.
The Fiend disarm'd, his sun-broad shield let fall,
And tore a huge crag from the cavern-wall;
Full on the Knight he hurl'd the pond'rous rock,
But to!  it crumbled with the magic shock!
Th' astonish'd Fiend beheld and wheel'd for flight,
But wheel'd in vain, for now the dext'rous Knight
Transpierc'd his heart &mdash; he tumbled to the ground.
Like batter'd tow'r, and, from his yawning wound
Gush'd cataracts of blood, and smok'd around.
Outstretch'd he lay and gasp'd in vain for breath
Huge, long, and grim, and dreadful e'en in death.

A pond'rous key, which rather th' anchor seem'd
Of a stout pinnace, lay beside the fiend,
Which soon the victor seiz'd, with joy elate,
And hasted forward to the dusky gate;
With effort huge the pond'rous key applied,
And heav'd each bolt and massy bar aside.
The jarring gate its dragon-wings display'd,
And sudden light the dazzled youth dismay'd.
Then full before him glow'd a prospect rare,
A valley gay, of groves and waters fair!
As he advanc'd the cavern wider grew,
And a new world seem'd opening on his view.
He reach'd the centre of that charming vale,
That vale of flow'rs, refresh'd by many a gale
That flew to greet him, while a warbled sound
Rose from the bloomy myrtle groves around.
He gaz'd aloft, to see from whence the light,
Which fill'd with glory all the region bright,
And lo!  the roof, which high above him hung,
Glitter'd with gems, and on the valley flung
A thousand hues &mdash; for there the Emerald green,
The violet Amethyst and Diamond sheen;
The yellow Hyacinth, the Jasper bright,
The rose-red ruby and green Chrysolite,
The sparkling Carbuncle and blue,
And countless gems which mortals never knew,
Their mingled lustre on the valley threw;
That all beneath &mdash; groves, streams, and plains seem'd clad
With rainbow-robes but this gay scene look'd sad
To sad Rinaldo, who with anxious eye,
Around him gaz'd the emerald lake to spy;
And soon with joy the gay-green lake he sees,
Fair gleaming, thro' the interjacent trees;
And soon he stood upon the pearly shore,
Of that fair lake and gaz'd it o'er and o'er.
O!  'twas a tranquil and resplendent flood,
Where, undisturb'd, the halcyons lov'd to brood,
And seem'd, far distant, to the dazzled sight,
An ocean, not of water, but of light.
A beauteous mermaid rested on the strand,
And comb'd her tresses with her lily hand:
And syrens, warbling on the rocks, were seen,
And snow-white swans upon the waters green.

Beyond that lake, a gorgeous mansion shone,
Bright as the fabled palace of the sun.
With tearful joy the anxious lover gaz'd&mdash;
The lake already was in fancy pass'd,
The dragon conquer'd, and the maid embrac'd:
But as the distant palace gleam'd again,
The sweet delusion vanish'd from his brain.
"Ah!  there," thought he &mdash; "there Oberon's palace lies,
And there, perhaps, my Crystalina sighs!
O!  for Elijah's mantle &mdash; Aaron's wand,
To cleave my passage to you golden strand."
Thus mus'd the Knight, when on his mem'ry fell
Titania's warning, with her glitt'ring shell;
Upon the flood the glitt'ring shell he cast,
And lo!  a pinnace rose, with gilded mast,
And silken sails!  and now, the hero springs
Upon her deck and spreads her snowy wings,
Towards the palace turns her silver prow,
Whilst gales arise, soft gales, and sweetly blow.
O!  you may fancy 'twas a goodly sight,
To see that pinnace cleaving with delight
The liquid em'rald, and diffusing wide,
Her golden glories on the quiv'ring tide!
Swift o'er the lake she fled before the wind,
And left a path of sparkling foam behind.
He cross'd the lake, and near the golden strand,
The pinnace moor'd and boldly leap'd to land&mdash;
When lo!  the pinnace vanish'd from his sight,
And on the flood, the shell lay glittering bright.
The magic shell the Knight secur'd again,
And tow'rds the Palace hurried on amain.
He saw the gate, the gate of massy gold,
Fast lock'd and guarded by a Dragon bold:&mdash;
The startled Knight, a moment only stay'd
His onward march, to couch his trusty blade;
Up rose the scaly Dragon in his might,
Shook his huge frame, with horrible delight,
And roar'd &mdash; the signal for tremendous fight;
But fiercely springing on the horrid foe,
Rinaldo struck a furious, well-aim'd blow;
His magic weapon pierc'd the monster's side.
And gushing blood the golden portals died.
The furious Dragon felt the fatal wound,
Bellow'd with pain and wheel'd infuriate round;
Grasp'd, with huge claws, the agonizing lance,
That gor'd his side, and tore it reeking thence;
And then, with pain intolerable stung,
Towards the Knight, with jaws expanded, sprung.
Aside the hero leap'd, with hasty care,
And the grim monster champ'd the vacant air:
But, ere the outrageous enemy could wheel,
Deep in his flank Rinaldo plung'd his steel.
Now drain'd of blood and overcome with pain,
The Dragon reel'd and strove, but strove in vain
To fly the fight &mdash; for ah!  another blow,
Pierc'd his huge heart and laid the monster low.
For joy, Rinaldo kiss'd his faithful spear,
And thank'd the God of battles with a war.
But when the high and massive gate he view'd,
And found no key, the Knight despondent stood;
The polish'd wall, insuperably high,
He view'd with angry and impatient eye,
Then with his lance the sounding portals strook&mdash;
The gate flew wide and all the palace shook!
Grim Oberon heard &mdash; leap'd fearful from his throne,
And martial Knights, who round him proudly shone,
Dropt their bright lances with unwonted fear,
And deem'd an angel or a Demon near.
With joy and hope the Knight advanc'd once more,
With spear uplifted, tow'rds the palace door&mdash;
Massy and high, each adamantine fold
Stood clos'd and bolted with the beaten gold.
With his strong spear the hero fiercely knock'd&mdash;
Again the palace to its base was rock'd.
The door stood firm!  he smote again &mdash; again,
With spear and shield, but smote, alas!  in vain.
When thus he saw his magic weapons fail,
His stout limbs trembled and his face grew pale:
But soon the Cross a sudden hope inspir'd,
And once again his pallid visage fir'd.
Quick, from his breast, the holy sign he drew,
And the huge valves, resounding, open flew.
Then boldly ent'ring, to a hall he ran,
Where quaking Oberon held his high Divan.
Touch'd by the Cross, the door expanded wide,
And trembling phantoms shrunk on every side.
In vain the monarch seiz'd his potent wand,
And round him wav'd it with his trembling band;
In vain pronounc'd his incantations dread,
That kill the living and awake the dead;
In vain cast circles of mysterious might&mdash;
For still unhurt advanc'd the fearless Knight.
"Back, rash intruder!" cried the haughty Fiend&mdash;
The dread command of Oberon attend!"
When Oberon's name resounded in his ear,
With firmer hand Rinaldo grasp'd his spear.
Upon his brow, as on a stately throne,
The awful majesty of Valour shone.
Flash'd from his eye-balls wrath's consuming fire&mdash;
His eyes more dreadful than Orion dire,
Whose parting frown proclaims the rising storm,
And fills the gazing seamen with alarm.
With desp'rate fury thro' the fiend he push'd
His magic steel; and sanguine torrents gush'd
From his gor'd breast; which never till that hour,
Was pain'd by man or sublunary pow'r.
Torments unknown amaz'd the shudd'ring sprite,
And, with a shriek, he vanish'd from his sight:
Such pow'r the spear and holy cross possess'd
O'er fairy charms and sorceries unblest!
But while the Knight impatiently survey'd
The splendid hall, to spy his captive maid&mdash;
Behold!  Egyptian darkness hung around,
And thunders roar'd and earthquakes shook the ground.
The winds arose; uptore the howling floods,
And, leagu'd with lightnings, overturn'd the woods.
Such uproar reigns, when Aetna, in his ire,
Shakes Sicily, and pours his cataracts dire,
Of molten rocks, and breathes destroying fire.
Shrouded in darkness stood th' astonish'd Knight,
And look'd, impatient, for returning light,
But look'd in vain.  At length, the cross divine,
The Knight display'd, and lo!  the sacred sign,
Shone, like a taper, thro' the dusky gloom,
And fill'd, with glorious light, the gorgeous room!
But ah!  its light could not Rinaldo cheer&mdash;
He found not lovely Crystalina here.

Now in his hand the holy cross be bore,
And boldly enter'd each recoiling door;
Each gilded room explor'd, with anxious eye,
And hop'd, in each, th' imprison'd maid to spy.
When all he search'd, but search'd, alas!  in vain.
He madly flew t' explore them all again.
Gladly, at length, he spied a secret door,
Fix'd in the centre of the ivory floor.
Before the cross the polish'd valve gave way,
And lo!  beneath a splendid chamber lay!
On steps of pearl, with ballustrade of gold,
The Knight descended, cautiously, though bold;
When hark!  shrill cries and flutt'ring wings he heard,
And, on the wall, a crystal cage appear'd!
Therein a bird, with golden plumage gay,
Shrieking full sad, in cruel thraldom lay&mdash;
Panting it lay, as overcome with fear,
And swoon'd away whene'er the Knight drew near,
But soon the youth, regardless of the sight,
Turn'd him away to seek his soul's delight.
With eager eye he sought his captive fair,
He sought, but ah!  found nothing but despair.
O, think what agony his bosom wrings,
At this sad moment!  frantickly he flings
His trembling frame along the polish'd floor,
In wild despair, despair unfelt before.
From every pore the chilly dew-drops start,
And strangling sorrows crowd upon his heart.
As there he lay, in motionless despair,
Melodious sounds awak'd his wond'ring ear.
O, 'twas a sweet, a well-known, fav'rite strain
That fill'd his soul with life and hope again!
Oft had he heard that same seraphic air,
So sweetly sung by his angelic Fair,
In regal chambers, on high festal day,
Mid princes, peers; mid dames and damsels gay,
That list'ning Knights had dropp'd their lances down&mdash;
And majesty lean'd ravish'd from his throne.
Quick rose the youth, with new-born vigour brac'd,
And from his soul the load of sorrow cast.
With fearful hope, the trembling lover rais'd
His streaming eyes and round the palace gaz'd.
Fair on the wail, the crystal cage still hung,
And lo!  thereon the beauteous warbler sung!
The Knight approach'd; the warbler ceas'd to sing,
And, tow'rds him flying, beat with eager wing
The glassy grates, and utter'd doleful cries,
And fill'd his soul with sorrowful surprise.
At length, exhausted, on its prison floor,
It flutter'd, fainted, and could shriek no more.
With trem'bling haste the brittle bars he broke,
And quickly thence, the lovely pris'ner took.
Soft on his hand th' unmoving bird be laid,
And fondly gazing, thus in fancy said&mdash;
"O, 'tis my love!  my Crystalina dear,
Transform'd, enchanted, and imprison'd here,
Or whence that fav'rite, well-known strain I heard,
So sweetly warbled by this captive bird?
Oft have I heard my lily-finger'd fair,
Strike from her harp that soul-subduing air,&mdash;
Her harp, which seem'd, with trem'lous joy, to lie
Beneath the fascination of her eye;
It is my love" &mdash; she knew her faithful Knight,
And, when she saw him, fainted with delight.
Thus mus'd the Knight, with pleasing fancies blest,
And to his lips the plumy captive press'd.
Rous'd by the youth's fond violence, behold!
The warbler wak'd and shook its plumes of gold;
Flew on his breast, and said, or seem'd to say,&mdash;
"Rinaldo, fly!  away, away, away!"
At once distress'd, delighted, and amaz'd,
He wept, and smil'd, and wonderd as he gaz'd.
At length the holy crucifix he took,
And cast to heav'n a supplicative look,
Thrice, with the cross, th' enchanted warbler strok'd,
And thrice the holy Trinity invok'd;
When lo!  the tuneful chorister was gone,
And in its place a golden vapour shone.
Amazing sight!  and, wonderful to tell
Enlarging, bright'ning, to the floor it fell.
Keen gaz'd the Knight, and saw with eager eyes,
A slender column, fair, before him rise.
Now from above, loose, golden tresses stream'd;
Now snow-white garments, indistinctly gleam'd;
Now plainer, plainer still the vision grew&mdash;
So smiling Cynthia brightens on the view,
When, to survey the earth or ocean wide,
She slowly draws her cloudy veil aside.
Now rose a neck, now swell'd a bosom fair,
Now budding features gradually appear;
And now her form breaks fully on his sight,
The heavenly form of Crystalina bright!
Trembling she stood, in all her native charms,
And sunk, transported, in Rinaldo's arms.
"'Tis she, 'tis she!" joyful hero cried&mdash;
"'Tis he, 'tis he!" the joyful maid replied.
O!  that my muse could paint th transports high,
That fill'd each heart, and glow'd in either eye;
The tender words, half smother'd with a kiss&mdash;
The sighs &mdash; the smiles &mdash; the tears of mutual bliss!
Yet no, my muse!  the vain wish I recall&mdash;
He never lov'd who cannot fancy all.

