No more the bard's heroic numbers flow,
To hail ambition from the field of war,
Should fortune to a tyrant's wishes bow,
And ruined nations drag the victor's car.
For patriot zeal, the choral song we raise
And twine the laurel, that shall ne'er decay;
While Britain's sons, till time's remotest days,
At freedom's shrine their duteous homage pay
With moral reason's critic skill explore,
The far fam'd triumphs of a distant age,
With caution trace the historian's courtly page,
And strip the gaudy robe from lawless power,
Thro' flattery's veil a despot's vices scan,
And own no heroes, but the patriot friends of MAN.

Such, ALFRED &mdash; he whose mighty genius planned
The public weal, and dignified a crown;
HAMPDEN, who foremost in a generous band,
Brav'd the stern menace of a tyrant's frown;
SIDNEY, a martyr in the cause of man,
Who firm amidst a fallen people stood;
Fixed Freedom's laws on Nature's equal plan,
And nobly sealed the doctrine with his blood.
Nor RUSSELL, shall thy honor'd fame decay,
Who scorned submission to oppressive power,
Ev'n in the last sad scene, that trying hour,
When Love and Friendship would prolong thy stay.
For these the bards of future times shall raise
Virtue's fair meed &mdash; no pensioned laureat's venal praise.

And long in British hearts their names shall live,
Who gain'd the splendid triumphs of this day,
Millions unborn the grateful praise shall give,
And Truth's impartial page their worth display.
Patriots, who shook a tyrant's throne of state,
And burst the fetters of the free-born soul;
When thoughtless of one STUART'S righteous fate,
He dared the storms of justice to controll:
Who listen'd to their injur'd country's voice,
And nobly toil'd in heav'n's approving hour,
Snatch'd from a worthless hand the sword of pow'r,
And rais'd the object of a people's choice,
From Britain's throne the gloomy despot hurl'd,
And gave a rare example to th' astonish'd world!

Bright was the glow of Freedom's dawning ray,
Though brighter beams the noontide hours adorn;
Nor let the nations in the blaze of day
Forget the first fair blushes of the morn.
On this glad day the great example rose,
That fired the Britons of a distant shore;
And call'd a people from their long repose,
Who bow'd inglorious to a tyrant's pow'r.
See!  the new world's industrious tribes appear,
Cherish the arts of peace with eager haste:
And where late frown'd the desart's gloomy waste,
To WASHINGTON the fed'ral City rear.
See!  Gallia crown'd with wreaths of civic fame,
The beauteous daughter fairer than the comely dame!

Gallia, in vain the ruffian Kings combine;
'Tis thine the code of social bliss to plan;
T' assert the sov'reign people's right divine,
And rouse the nations in the cause of man;
Ere long Germania, daring to be free,
Shall join her millions to thy patriot band,
Echo the shout of "death or liberty,"
And chace the princely locusts from her land.
Iberia too, where Superstition's fane,
Has stood for ages propt by lawless power,
Shall wake to Reason in some fav'ring hour
And Grecia hear a new Olympic strain;
E'en Russia's torpid slaves the sound prolong,
Till "death or liberty" be ev'ry nation's song.

Then science, rescued from the bigot's cell,
And the dark mazes of scholastic strife,
Amidst the busy haunts of men shall dwell,
And give new pleasures to domestic life.
Nor shall the winged bark her sails expand,
To hurl wide ruin on some helpless shore;
But friendly commerce join each distant land,
And nations learn the arts of war no more.
Nor proud oppression lift her front abhor'd,
Nor wearied labour mourn his fruitless care;
No more the vineyard dress, the olive rear
To deck a tyrant lord's luxurious board:
For white-rob'd peace shall visit earth again,
And justice dwell with pow'r in freedom's equal reign!

Britons, revolve the triumphs of the day,
When virtue struggled for the public weal;
Yet to the mem'ry of our fathers pay,
No servile homage, but an equal zeal:
Nor rest supine, when freedom's injur'd cause
Demands the vigour of each patriot son;
Nor cease the toil till fixt on equal laws,
The rights of all mankind to all are known!
Hail, LIBERTY in early time rever'd,
To thee shall unborn ages raise the song,
While rescu'd nations to thy temple throng;
And, oh!  where'er the hallow'd fane be rear'd,
From the bleak North to Afric's sultry waste,
FIRM MAY THY ALTAR STAND, TILL TIME ITSELF BE PAST.
