How Altagrand such wonders could perform,
Perchance the wond'ring reader may inquire&mdash;
How shake huge Alps, and rouse the slumb'ring storm?
But who shall tell?  or how, at Saul's desire,
The hag of Endor, with enchantments dire,
Rais'd Samuel's ghost?  Or how, 'gainst God,
When Pharaoh's impious Magi durst conspire,
They chang'd the crystal rivers into blood,
Their wands to serpents, and with reptiles fill'd the flood?

But sure I am, the meek and godly Seer,
Whose deeds I sing, whose character revere,
No league with hell or hellish pow'rs maintain'd,
Nor with unholy orgies e'er profan'd
The eye of heav'n &mdash; but rather do I ween
Long solitude, a conscience all serene&mdash;
Superior wisdom, faith, and piety;
Pray'r, absolution, fast, and converse free
With God and nature, angeliz'd his soul,
And gave the Seer o'er nature's laws control.

Now from the cave, with light and happy heart,
Through wilds untrod th' advent'rous pilgrims start;
Through tangled brakes, o'er craggy ways and wild.
With tedious march and slow they onward toil'd.
With fondest care th' unwearied Knight upstay'd,
And o'er each crag and torrent bore the maid.
And cheerfully, for his dear mistress' sake,
Hew'd, with his sword, a passage through each brake.
Not far they journey ere, before their eyes,
Mountains and cliffs impassable arise.
The weary maid, desponding, view'd the place,
Then look'd for comfort in Rinaldo's face,
And weeping, said, "we ne'er shall reach the main,
We ne'er shall see our happy home again!"
The mournful hero turn'd his face aside,
The gushing sorrows of his eyes to hide,
When thus the Hermit &mdash; "weep not lady fair,
Distrust not God's beneficence and care;
All will be well &mdash; heaven's king will ne'er forsake,
The child of virtue, e'en for virtue's sake."&mdash;
Thus having said, he wav'd his ebon wand!
Shudder'd afar the hollow-rumbling land,
The mountain yawn'd, and flames, and rolling smoke,
From the huge chasm with sounds tempestuous broke;
And in the midst, a chariot, like the dawn,
Uprose at once, by milk-white horses drawn.
The fearful maid, the wond'rous vision spied,
And closer clung to brave Rinaldo's side.
But soon the lovers, at the Seer's command,
Approach'd the chariot, which, on level land,
Advanc'd to meet them from the fiery hill,
Roll'd on by steeds obedient to his will.
The chariot halted, and with tim'rous feet
The pair ascended to its gorgeous seat;
Station'd before, the smiling hermit took
The broider'd reins; the broider'd reins be shook,
And with his wand the quaking chariot strook.
Swift as from clouds th' unfetter'd light'nings dart,
With thund'ring hoofs the fiery coursers start.
Meanwhile the mountains sink!  the valleys rise,
And one vast level spreads before their eyes!

Now Phebus fair had half his journey made,
And eastward turn'd the mountain's length'ning shade.
Yet e'er the night, and e'er the king of light
Had quench'd his lamp in ocean's billows bright,
They reach'd the bay, whose billow-beaten shore
Spurn'd the salt flood and mock'd its angry roar.
The chariot gay, a golden cloud became,
And from their sight was rapt by steeds of flame.
High on a jutting cliff, the trav'llers stood.
And, far below, beheld the ocean flood.
Quickly, the Knight explor'd, with anxious eye,
The winding bay, his anchor'd ship to spy
But now, nor ship, nor mariner was there,
And all was silence, all was stillness drear;
Save where the indefatigable main
Warr'd on the rocks, and foam'd with fury vain
Or Eagles, frighted from the dizzy steep,
Scream'd, as they sought the lone and mighty deep.
A dark ravine led downward to the main,
(By earthquake rifted, or descending rain.)
Thro' which they pass'd, with toilsome march and slow.
And safely reach'd the wave-wash'd strand below.
But oh!  a horrid spectacle they view'd!
Rinaldo's ship lay scatter'd on the flood,
A mournful wreck!  and on the blood stain'd shore
His murder'd crew lay gash'd and black with gore;
Strange corpses too, deform'd with many a wound,
Among his friends were strewn, unburied, round.
The Virgin gaz'd upon the gory scene,
With hands uplifted and despondent mien;
Speechless she gaz'd, more pale, more cold than clay;
Her heart stood still, her trembling limbs gave way.
In vain the Knight to quell her rising fears,
Kiss'd her dear lips and dried her crystal tears.
"Fear not" &mdash; he said," fear not!  for I, anon,
Will build a storm-proof vessel and begone;
The precious shell that bore us o'er the lake,
I still have kept for good Titania's sake"&mdash;
He spake and cast the shell into the main,
But ah!  no fairy pinnace rose again,
With gilded mast and snowy sails dispread&mdash;
The faithless shell now sunk in ocean's bed!
The Knight beheld &mdash; the blood his cheeks forsook,
And all his frame with disappointment shook;
Speechless he gaz'd, when lo!  the mighty Seer
Wav'd his black wand and bade the shell appear!
The shell appear'd, and floated near the strand,
And thrice he touch'd it with his ebon wand,
When &mdash; lo!  uprose a pinnace, gilded bright
From helm to prow; the decks were ivory white.
The sails were silk: &mdash; aloft, the yards among,
Six fairy sailors on the tackling hung,
And speedily unfurl'd the flutt'ring sail,
While rustling hills announc'd the rising gale.

With haste the lovers left the pearly strand,
And scal'd the ship with hoary Altagrand.
High on the deck the awful hermit stood,
His face towards the watery solitude.
Their bark is good, the winds propitious blow,
Heav'n smiles above, and ocean smiles below.
But in the entrance of that narrow bay
A desolate and rocky Island lay.
That isle they pass'd, and scarcely pass'd, when lo!
Upon their left they spied an ambush'd foe!
Behind that island lay six galleys bold,
With ruffians mann'd, and dreadful to behold:
A crew piratic, who by murder liv'd,
Grew rich by plunder, by destruction thriv'd.
The fairy bark, which, like a rising sun,
Shone on the waves the pirates spied anon,
Along the sea her merry progress run.
They look'd and shouted, "lo!  a prize!  a prize!"
And startled ocean with their savage cries;
Up rush'd their anchors; and their oary sweep
Dash'd into foam, the billows of the deep;
The coming foes fair Crystalina spied&mdash;
To heav'n for help; to them for mercy cried;
But, sheath'd in magic armour, frown'd the Knight;
Scarce hoping vict'ry, yet resolv'd on fight.
So near at length the hostile galleys drew,
That to the ship, their show'ring arrows flew,
The virgin swoon'd, and e'en Rinaldo fear'd,
When on the deck the falling darts he heard;
Not for himself he fear'd, but for the fair,
Who round him clung and claim'd his guardian care;
Not so the Seer; with looks serenely grand,
The tossing helm he held with steady hand.
He saw the Virgin's and the Knight's despair;
He heard the foe's loud exultations near
Then, mutt'ring spells, his mighty wand he took,
And now the air, and now the ocean strook&mdash;
The sky grew black!  the troubled ocean gave
A sullen roar, and groan'd from ev'ry wave;
Thron'd in a chaos, and a night of cloud,
Discharg'd the thunder, his artillery loud;
And the dread king of tempests, from the shore,
Proclaim'd his coming, with tremendous roar.
He drove the sea before him, and uppil'd
Huge waves on waves, of foamy waters wild,
As if on dark conglomerated floods,
To scale the heav'ns, and, with the angry gods.
Wage impious battle; like the Titans bold,
Who Ossa huge on tott'ring Pelion roll'd.
Then might they hear th' affrighted seamen's cries,
What time, uplifted in the stormy skies,
High on the slippery pinnacle they rode,
Of some tall wave, and view'd th' outrageous flood
That yawn'd below!  then might they hear the crash
Of meeting gallies, plung'd with furious dash,
Beneath the madding billows of the main.
With all her crew, no more to rise again.
With dreadful joy, the anxious lovers view'd
The shatter'd galleys, whelm'd beneath the flood.
And, from their foes miraculously sav'd,
Forgot the chaos, that around them rav'd.
Of winds and waters, and the uproar loud
Of vollied fires that rent the low hung cloud.

Tho' to the winds, unfurl'd was every sail,
The bark, unhurt, sustain'd th' impetuous gale:
She seem'd the rainbow of the storm, and smil'd
On the rough deep, and tam'd the tempest wild.

Now when the Hermit, from the lofty deck,
Sublimely calm, survey'd the mighty wreck,
He pour'd a magic oil into the sea,
And utter'd words of awful potency.
The sea grew smooth, the tempest rag'd no more,
The clouds dispers'd, the thunder ceas'd to roar.
And now the pinnace rode, in stately pride,
The foamy sea, and fill'd the waters wide,
With fairy splendours &mdash; all the day they sped,
And all the night; and when, on Ocean's bed,
The placid moon her milky light dispread,
O, they would sit and view the polish'd main,
Sprinkled with stars; which seem'd the starry plain
Of heaven inverted; then, thrice happy pair!
When mellow moonlight softened all the air,
And nought around them met the roving eye,
But sky above, below both sea and sky,
They lov'd to sit and tell, with many a sigh,
Their strange adventures in the Fairy Land;
Or hear, entranc'd, the gray-hair'd Altagrand
Sing antique tales of knights, of wizards old,
Enchanted castles, Dragons, Giants bold.
Such pleasing wonders to his lyre he sung,
While all the sea with sounds melodious rung;
And tuneful syrens, minstrels of the waves,
Enchanted heard and left their coral caves;
And mermaids musical, and sea-nymphs fair,
Combing with ivory fingers their green hair,
On golden rocks set in the silver sea,
Then gaz'd, and listen'd to his melody.
The Dolphins too, that love harmonious sound,
As poets feign, drew near; and, sporting round.
Leviathan his magic music heard,
And, o'er the deep, his head enormous rear'd.
And Neptune's self was dimly seen afar,
On Ocean's plain, to stay his splendid car;
Towards the ship his ravish'd ears incline,
Hush all the winds, and lay the ruffled brine.

All ear, all spirit, sat the listening Knight;
His fancy, free and giddy with delight,
Rode on the wings of harmony; his eye
Uplifted, shone with love and ecstacy.
The minstrel ended; but the sea-born train
Still lean'd to hear, and silence rul'd the main.
Then thus the Knight &mdash; "Another strain, O, Seer!"
"Another strain!" replied th' enraptur'd fair&mdash;
"Behold the tenants of the deep flock round,
Tam'd by the magic potency of sound;
Behold the stars, sweet-twinkling with delight,
Pursue our ship.  The radiant queen of night,
More plenteous showers her snow-soft silver light;
And all the restless billows of the Deep,
With sounds mellifluous are lull'd to sleep.
Now can I credit tales of Poets old,
Who th immortal verse have sweetly told,
How once Arion, sailing on the sea,
From Lesbos, bound to classic Italy,
Ere his vile comrades cast him in the tide,
Allur'd a Dolphin to the vessel's side
With melody!  and how the Dolphin bore,
The lyrist safe to Tenedos' fair shore.
And scarcely now incredible I deem,
Amphion's tale, tho' wonderful it seem
Who with his lyre's sweet music did upcall,
Th' obsequious stones to build the Theban wall.
Nor yet the story of the Syrens three,
Who lur'd the list'ning rovers of the sea,
With songs enchanting to their fatal Isle,
And there devour'd the victims of their guile.
And well might Orpheus with Apollo's lyre,
Things void of life, with new-born life inspire;
Move trees and rocks; arrest impetuous floods,
And tame the savage tenants of the woods.
Nor yet were they extravagant who sung,
How yon cerulean amplitude, thus hung
With lamps eternal, from confusion sprung,
Obedient to the voice of Harmony;
And all yon orbs thro' heaven's immensity,
In order roll'd; and how the tuneful spheres.
With strains, inaudible to mortal ears,
Still rule, sustain the universal frame,
Which else old Chaos would confound again."

Thus having spoke, th' enthusiastic maid,
With gentle importunity, essay'd
To urge the Seer, the story to unfold,
Of his own life; or some adventure bold,
In love or war, transacted in his prime
Of strength and beauty &mdash; he, with hand sublime,
Of his loud lyre the chords symphonious shook,
And round him cast an awe-inspiring look.
Th' attentive pair in eager silence hung,
As wildly thus the hoary Minstrel sung.

THE HERMIT'S TALE.
I.
"Awake!  O, wizard Memory awake!
And with thy torch, thy magic torch, relume,
Of other years, the dark sepulchral gloom.&mdash;
O Memory awake!
They rise!  the visions of the past arise!
They brighten on my aged eyes&mdash;
The pale procession of departed years,
To my reverted sight appears.
Tremendous days!  the steadfast earth did shake;
The broad-bas'd Pyramids and mountains reel'd,
And wave-toss'd navies on the ocean danc'd:
The Boreal light,
Portentous sight,
Glar'd on th' aerial battle field.
Where barbed war-steeds pranc'd,
And shadowy hosts their martial squadrons wheel'd.
Th' unfetter'd Comet, in the heav'ns, advanc'd
His baleful beacon; and the sun and moon,
Black with eclipses, threaten'd nature's doom.

II.
Presages dire, to man below,
Of war and pestilence and wo!
Then lion-hearted Richard bold,
Uprose in pious wrath, and roll'd
His eyes upon the knightly throng,
Of mailed warriors fierce and strong&mdash;
"By Christ, the Saviour crucified,
By blood-stain'd Calvary" &mdash; he cried,
"I will redeem from Paynim hand,
The Holy Land!"
With loud acclaim the knights reply,
And shake their vengeful spears on high&mdash;
"We will redeem from Paynim hand,
The Holy Land!"

III.
Bold Richard led his warlike thousands on,
Afar the din of battle spread,
Afar the pomp of Armies shone,
That march'd for Holy Land.
'Twas then from Scotia's realm I sped,
From Tweed's delightful shore,
With thee, O!  gallant Armigrand,
And join'd the legions Richard led.
(A baron's title then we bore.)
Ah!  then these snowy locks were brown,
And strong this frame so feeble grown;
And strong, ah!  strong this trembling hand,
Which mow'd the battle down.

IV.
We met with onset fierce and fell,
We met the whisker'd Infidel&mdash;
The trumpet bids; the armies close!
The tempest of the battle grows
The clang of shields, the clash of spears.
And shrieks and shouts assail my ears.
See the couch'd lance in shivers broke!
See war-steeds staggering from the shock!
See prostrate knight and shatter'd car,
Trampled beneath the lout of war!

As from a mountain pour the floods,
As rushing tempests tear the woods;
As midnight conflagration roars,
Thro' some vast city and devours,
Tow'rs, tumbling castles, and cathedrals old,
So loud, so fierce, our squadrons bold,
With crash of shields and lances, fell
Upon the haughty Infidel.

V.
Tell, O!  my lyre.  (for age may boast,)
How, foremost of the Christian host,
Their close-compacted ranks I broke,
And fell'd a foe at every stroke.
And thou, O!  much-lov'd Armigrand wast there&mdash;
We fought, we conquer'd, side by side;
That day the splendours of thy spear
In pagan blood were died.
Unndaunted, back to back we stood,
Begirt with foes and splash'd with blood,
And though with bristling spears beset,
Through crowded ranks we broke,
As ocean's monarch, in his wrath,
Breaks through the fisher's net.

VI.
Not long the Paynim hosts withstood
The army of the living God.
We conquer'd, and with Armigrand,
I reach'd again my native land.
Then Scotia's royal court we sought,
Where King, and Peers, and Ladies bright,
Bless'd the champion bold, who fought
In Palestine the holy fight.

I saw Lord Harold's daughter fair,
I saw and lov'd the maid;
Her voice was soft as summer air,
As streamlet on its pearly bed;
Dark, dark as raven's wing her hair,
Red her cheeks, as roses red.

VII.
Earl Rowland was my rival bold,
His monarch's fav'rite, proud and high.
And on me still dark Rowland roll'd
A jealous and a threat'ning eye.
He sent his challenge in his ire&mdash;
We met &mdash; we fought &mdash; on steeds of fire,
We charg'd with desperation dire:
As a proud ship before the blast,
Dashes on some stupendous rock&mdash;
Recoils and crumbles with the shock;
So Rowland charg'd me fierce and fast&mdash;
So back recoil'd; and on the field,
Fell horse and horseman, spear and shield.
Why did I spare the recreant's life?&mdash;

VIII.
I woo'd Lord Harold's daughter bright,
We fix'd the bridal day;
But fortune, still with love at strife,
Eclips'd, O, Hope!  thy transient ray,
With Grief's eternal night.
Dark Rowland saw, with envious eye,
My day of bliss and triumph nigh;
He saw and sought a Wizard's cell,
And learn'd a dark and mighty spell,
By which he could transform, at will,
His shape, and any shape assume,
Or walk through crowds at brightest noon,
To human eyes invisible.
Then with my likeness, voice, and dress,
And action, counterfeited well,
He sought my darling Christabelle.
All in a tangled woodbine bower,
O'erarch'd with blossoms numberless,
They sat in evening's my hour.
There Rowland, (O, ignoble Knight!)
With speeches fasle, the heart beguil'd,
Of Christabella bright.
He said, and scornfully he smil'd,
That he, that I, for causes light,
The bridal day had then forgot,
My plighted faith regarded not.
"False Altagrand!" the Virgin cried,
And swell'd with high indignant pride&mdash;
"Hear me &mdash; O, perjured miscreant, hear!
By all the powers of Love, I swear
Thy perfidy shall cost thee dear!"
Thus spake the broken-hearted maid,
And left the Knight, insulted and betray'd.

IX.
Next morn, with Harold forth I rode,
With spear and shield, and hound and horn,
To chase the wild-boar of the wood&mdash;
Ah!  melancholy morn!
The boar was rous'd &mdash; the forest rung
With horn and hound, and hunter's cry;
Forward on foamy steed I sprung;
O'er moory dale, o'er mountain high,
O'er heaths, through woven brakes I wind,
And leave my comrades all behind;
And charging on the bristly foe,
At one bold thrust I laid him low.

X.
Now spent with toil, beneath a shade,
I laid me down by Teviot's side,
When lo!  a youth, in arms array'd,
With helmet, shield, and battle-blade,
Adown the vale did ride.
With flashing eyes and frenzied look,
"Turn, treacherous Knight!" the champion spoke&mdash;
"'Tis Halydon who comes to thee&mdash;
The brother bold of Christabelle,
Death's pale-white horse I ride, and hell
Doth follow me!"
He said, and from his charger sprung&mdash;
My shield before my breast I flung,
And turn'd the feeble lance aside.
"Peace!  peace!  presumptuous boy," I cried&mdash;
"For all thy lands I would not harm
The brother of that noble fair;
Then check the fury of thine arm,
And say, what madness brings thee here?"&mdash;
"Revenge hath brought me, traitor proud!"
Replied the champion, harsh and loud,
And aim'd a fiercer blow.
But from his head the helmet fell,
And down his raven locks did flow&mdash;
The raven locks of Christabelle!
I dash'd my buckler to the ground,
I sprang to clasp the maid.&mdash;
"False fiend avaunt!" she said, and frown'd,
And pierc'd me with her lifted blade.
"Blest be thy cruel hand," I cried,
And fell, all bleeding, by her side.
"'Tis done!" she said, with frenzied smile,
And tears were gushing all the while&mdash;
"Grieve not, my love, 'twas Cupid's dart
That pierc'd thy cold and cruel head;
Grieve not &mdash; thou art, thou shalt be mine,
Death waits, our plighted hands to join:
But hark!  a hunter's horn I hear&mdash;
My father and my friends are near!"

XI.
She spake, and seiz'd, with frantic joy,
A sword that glitter'd on her thigh&mdash;
She pierc'd her tender side.
"Lie down with me, my love," she cried&mdash;
"Lie down, and we will sweetly sleep
Together on this flow'ry ground;
The red-breast shall our vigils keep,
And on us pile the leaves around,
And sing our fun'ral dirge, and weep."

XII.
Thus spake the maid, and swoon'd away,
And speech!ess by her side I lay.
There, when the hunters reach'd the dale,
They found us senseless, cold, and pale.
Our wounded bodies, red with gore,
To Harold's castle soon they bore;
They summon'd soon, from far and near,
Each one for healing art renown'd;
The skilful leaches flocking came,
With potent herbs and balms of fame,
With  mystic salves to oil the spear,
And spells to stanch the willing wound.
Among them came  Wizard old,
Whose spell had wrought our misery,
And he to Christabella told
Earl Rowland's treachery.
O, then, how joyful was the maid,
The witness of my innocence to hear!
She kiss'd the wound her hand had made,
And moisten'd it with many a tear.
Her love, her pity-streaming eyes
Made enviable my miseries;
These, only these, o'er death and pain prevail'd,
Without these, all their surgery had fail'd.

XIII.
Soon we recovered &mdash; wedded soon&mdash;
And when the ninth propitious moon,
Witnessed our conjugal beatitude;
When happy planets in conjunction stood,
She made me father of the sweetest boy
That ever gave his mother joy.
But wherefore hast thou bid me tell
Of blasted pleasures?  Why bid mem'ry wake
Sorrows that sleep beneath the wreck of years,
And open break
The sealed fountains of forgotten tears?
Why bid me sing how baleful Wormwood fell
Upon the rivers of my happiness,
And chang'd them all to bitterness?

XIV.
Disastrous day!  remember'd still too well!
As unattended in her garden fair,
Walk'd forth my darling Christabelle,
To breathe the evening's odorous air,
Dark Rowland close in ambush lay.
And, like a tiger, watch'd his prey.
She reach'd the garden's utmost bound,
Whose wall o'erlook'd a dizzy steep,
And hoarsely echoed to the sound
Of the subterfluent deep;
There Rowland from his ambush broke,
With lustful threats, and fiendish look!
He rush'd to sieze th' unguarded prey&mdash;
She could not fly, she would not yield,
She shriek'd, but help was far away,
And lo!  the fiend rush'd on amain.
But now towards the cliff she wheel'd&mdash;
"Behold!  mistaken wretch!" she cries,
"True virtue human rage defies."
She said, and headlong plung'd into the main.

XV.
I heard her cry &mdash; to aid her quickly flew,
And reach'd the spot ere Rowland could retire;
No word we spake, but instant drew,
And met with resolution dire;
I cleft his helm and head in two&mdash;
What mortal man on earth could stand
In such a cause, 'gainst such a hand!

XVI.
My fury o'er, aghast I stood&mdash;
"My wife sepulchred in the flood!
Myself the murderer of a Peer,
Though base, unto his monarch dear;
My child, my all, to ruin brought!"
Thus toss'd from wave to wave of thought,
I hasted to my Armigrand.
At midnight, as alone we sate,
A loud mob thunder'd at his gate&mdash;
The friends of Rowland were at hand.
I drew my sword, and in my wrath,
Hew'd through the crowd a bloody path.
And fled from country, friend, and child
I sought Sky's lonely, wizard land,
Where thirty years I liv'd exil'd,
In cavern rude, and forest wild&mdash;
Such are the woes of Altagrand."

Thus briefly sang the hoary-headed sire,
His woes rekindling with poetic fire.
But tears roll'd down from brave Rinaldo's eye&mdash;
They were not tears of wo, but ecstacy.
Oft, while the Seer his wondrous tale pursued,
The Knight upsprang in fierce and frantic mood,
Then sat again &mdash; and gaz'd, and gaz'd the while,
Tears in his eyes, and on his lips a smile.
The Virgin too, who oft his tale had heard,
O'erwhelm'd with wonder and with joy, appear'd&mdash;
And when, at length, the mournful minstrel ceas'd,
They sprang towards him, and with joy embrac'd.
"Behold!" he cried, " thy long-lost orphan boy,
Thy boy Rinaldo!  Wake to life and joy!
Behold the daughter of thy Armigrand,
Constrain'd, like thee, to fly his native land.
The heav'ns repay, with usury, at last,
The long, the sad privations of the past."&mdash;
"It cannot be!" the musing Hermit said&mdash;
"It cannot be&mdash;" and shook his hoary head.
"Well I remember, on that fatal night,
When I from Scotia took my lonely flight,
I saw her seiz'd and slain in desp'rate strife,
His love for me cost Armigrand his life."
The Knight exclaim'd, "I know thy story well,
Hear me, my Father!  hear me briefly tell
What to thy friend, and what to me befel.
His life was spar'd; his costly castle ras'd,
His lands confiscate, and his name disgrac'd.
He, thus forlorn, and guilty of no crime
But love for thee, forsook his native clime.
At secret midnight, with a chosen band,
Unseen, he hurried to the ocean strand.
Me in his arms into the ship be bore,
And sea-ward turning the advent'rous prore,
He bade adieu to the ungrateful shore.
His guardian angel, with propitious gales,
To Mermaid Isle impell'd his errant sails.
Scarce had we reach'd that rich and lovely land,
When we beheld, encamp'd, an armed band.
Two chiefs, contending for imperial sway,
Had long embroiled the isle in civil fray.
For either chief a thousand warriors stood,
And stain'd the island with fraternal blood.
With joy, the Host received the stranger knight,
And gave him rule, in council and in fight:
He, of their ebbing fortunes, turn'd the tide,
And Victory rode triumphant at his side.
In one dread fight, the rival chiefs were slain,
And half their heroes perish'd on the plain.
On that dread day, what time both armies stood,
With fight exhausted, and alike subdued,
Thy friend between the adverse legions rode,
And loud, a trumpet of defiance blow'd&mdash;
A trumpet answered, and a bright-mail'd Knight,
Spurr'd out to meet him &mdash; 'twas a dreadful sight!
And such deep silence overhung the war,
That all might hear their trampling steeds afar.
They charg'd, they fought in either army's view,
And Armigrand, with giant might, o'erthrew
His huge antagonist &mdash; when lo!  a cry
From either host, that shook the pillar'd sky,
Proclaim'd him King; and, to confirm their words,
The hostile squadrons sheath'd their bloody swords:
A golden sceptre in his hand they plac'd,
And with a crown his god-like temples grac'd.
Meanwhile the armies mingled on the plain,
And gladly greeting, met in peace again.
He reign'd belov'd, and nobly wedded soon,
The true, though banish'd heiress of the throne.
This lovely maid, alone, their union blest,
Of all her sex the fairest and the best."
Rinaldo ceas'd &mdash; the Seer, with doubtful joy,
Gaz'd on the Knight, and clasp'd his gallant boy.
The Virgin too his fond embraces shar'd,
And mutual smiles and tears their bliss declar'd.
Such great events, such joys ineffable,
On the lone sea our voyagers befel,
What time they sail'd from Sky's mysterious land,
Bound to the isle of royal Armigrand.

