Wide rag'd the storm; and o'er the vaulted sky,
Convolving clouds their deep-blue billows roll'd;
From north to south, the red-wing'd lightnings fly,
And voice of Thunder, horrible and bold,
Shook the huge pillars and foundations old,
That rear aloft the steadfast firmament&mdash;
Down from the mountain's groaning top, behold!
The roaring cat'ract rush'd, on ruin bent,
Mingled with mighty rocks, by vollied lightnings rent!

Tremendous scene!  the prowlers of the wood
Stop'd in mid-chase and spar'd their victim's blood,
Fled to their caves, or crouching with alarm,
Howl'd at the passing spirits of the storm!
Eye-blasting spectres and bleach'd skeletons,
With snow-white raiment and disjointed bones,
Before them strode; and meteors, flickering dire:
Around them trail'd their scintillating fire,
Livid and pale as light of fun'ral pyre.

Serenely grand, the venerable Sage
Beheld the scene and heard the tempest rage,
Then rose abruptly, and with accents dire,
Bade the fierce demons of the storm retire!
The clouds dispers'd; again the tranquil moon
Sat in mid sky upon her silver throne,
And heaven's blue vault with stars unnumber'd shone.
No sound was heard, save where the torrent hoar
Down the steep mountain fell with sullen roar,
Or far away exploding long and loud,
The deep-ton'd thunder rent the fiery cloud.
Then thus, beneath the th' under-riven oak,
The hoary wizard to Rinaldo spoke&mdash;
"See'st thou yon glade, where quiv'ring moon-beams play,
Like dancing spectres on a tomb-stone gray?
In that still glade a Fairy-circle lies&mdash;
When Cynthia, Night's torch-bearer, light the skies
There sportive Fairies dance till Phoebus rise;
If so thou dar'st, approach that circle dread,
And thrice three times around it boldly tread.
Then shall the earth beneath thy feet expand,
And a dark road disclose to Fairy land."
The Hermit ceas'd, and by the dim moon-light,
Rinaldo spied the circle, glist'ning bright.
Back to his cave the old magician went,
Whilst bold Rinaldo tow'rds the circle, bent
His desperate course &mdash; his temper'd steel he drew,
And thrice around the mystic circle flew.
Then rose from earth deep groans and fearful cries,
And lurid meteors shot along the skies.
When round the ring he hurried thrice again,
The earth sent up a blue sulphureous flame,
That burnt and quiver'd like a dying lamp&mdash;
But on he press'd with firm and fearless tramp.
Now when nine times the Knight had hasted round,
The hollow earth sent forth a rumbling sound,
And, wide and sudden, yawn'd the rocking ground.
Down the dark chasm the desp'rate warrior strode,
With random steps along a viewless road;
Till massy rocks his onward march oppos'd,
And o'er his head the earth in thunder clos'd;
But soon a passage in the cloven stone
With joy he found and boldly hurried on.
But slow and cautious, with his pond'rous spear,
Pois'd his bold march along the lab'rinth drear.
Thro' rayless glooms; thro' silence deep and dread,
Down, downward far the dismal cavern led.
At length beneath him shone a silver light,
Like glow-worm twinkling thro' the gloom of night.
And tuneful sounds, celestial, high, and clear,
Rose from beneath and charm'd his wond'ring ear.
Thither he sped, and from the narrow way
Sprang with delight into a realm of day,
And upright stood upon the radiant plain
Of Fairy land, a heavenly domain.
O!  'twas a valley of enchanting view,
Where all things lovely and delightful grew;
Where groves of orange, cinnamon, and myrrh,
Trees that bled frankincense and balsams rare,
With grateful odours fill'd the breezy air&mdash;
Elysian groves of harmony and flow'rs,
Leafy pavillions and ambrosial bow'rs;
With many a mead and many a winding stream,
Glade flow'ring fair and glittering lake between.
Not the spic'd breeze, from Ceylon's groves that springs,
Or shakes Arabian odours from its wings;
Not shining gardens of Hesperides,
Whose golden rivers and auriferous trees,
The setting sun from his prone chariot sees,
Nor aught on earth for fragrance could compare,
Nor yet for beauty with this valley fair.
This gay, celestial valley to enclose,
Mountains sublime in even circle rose,
And tow'ring high, on tip-toe seem'd to stand,
To gaze enchanted on the radiant land.
Glowing aloft a golden cloud was spread,
Whose splendid vault a rich effulgence shed
On all below &mdash; for sun, nor moon, nor star
Was ever seen, or ever needed there.
Like a vast Amphitheatre it seem'd,
With mountain walls; from storm and sunshine screen'd
By costly canopy of sheeted gold&mdash;
But greater far and fairer to behold.
In sweet amaze and exultation high,
O'er all the scene the youth directs his eye&mdash;
His wilder'd thoughts in floods of rapture float,
And time and place and being are forgot&mdash;
"Celestial visions!" cried th' astonish'd Knight&mdash;
"Ye golden prospects that enchant my sight!
Are ye indeed substantial?  or but vain,
And wild illusions of a love-sick brain?
Methinks I dream!"  When thus Rinaldo said,
His well-known self he doubtfully survey'd,
And wav'd his arms and shook his plumed head.
But soon the mem'ry of his captive love
The sweet amazement from his senses drove.
"Fair land!" he cried &mdash; "And dangerous as fair,
A foe to thy prosperity is near;
Darkness shall soon thy saffron skies o'erwhelm&mdash;
I come to spoil thee of thy richest gem&mdash;
But where, where fly to find my captive fair?
No cities, fields or cottages appear.
'Tis desert all &mdash; th' unnumber'd flow'rets sweet
Lift their gay heads unbruis'd by living feet;
Ev'n at my band the fearless songsters sing,
And round me flutter with familiar wing;
Or mid the flow'rs, like sun-beams, glance about,
Sipping with slender tongues the dainty nectar out.
O!  this is Heav'n, if here my angel dwell;
If not, tho' Heav'n, it is to me a hell&mdash;
But &mdash; madd'ning thought!  perchance the monarch dire
Of Fairy land, enflam'd by lewd desire,
In some well-fav'ring, some enchanting place,
Compels my angel to his curst embrace!
Perhaps, subdued by his infernal spells,
Her virtuous soul, with hell-bred passion swells!
Forbid it heav'n!  it cannot, shall not be&mdash;
Hell hath no pow'r o'er heav'n-born chastity."

He ceas'd, and now a glittering palace sees,
Deep in the vale amid embow'ring trees!
A splendid pile of precious gems it seems,
Wrapt in a blaze of variegated beams&mdash;
With cautious steps he thither bent his way,
Whilst all around, irradiations gay
Full on his pathway beam'd celestial day.
He trode on carpets, gorgeously display'd,
Of woven flow'rs and grassy verdure made.
From all the waving trees, the plumy throngs
Welcom'd the warlike stranger with their songs
And lo!  from bow'rs of myrtle, fair and green,
A choir of damsels dance with smiling mien!
Their silken robes the playful zephyrs throw
From side to side and wantonly bestow
Delightful glimpses of their limbs of snow.
With lily-hands they strike the trembling strings
Of golden lyres &mdash; the grove responsive rings,
Soothing his soul with endless echoings.
With harp and song and salutations sweet,
The smiling damsels, thus the hero greet&mdash;

1.
"Welcome gay and gallant Knight,
Welcome to these regions bright!
Yon Palace, rich and fair, behold,
With diamond wall arid roof of gold&mdash;
For thee its shining doors unfold.

2.
"Banks of pearl and golden sand,
And rocks of diamond fill the land;
Music flows from ev'ry tree.
And knights and ladies fair to see.
Ready wait to honour thee.

3.
"Hasten, hasten gallant Knight&mdash;
Hasten to yon palace bright&mdash;
There resides our Fairy King,
With lords and ladies revelling,
Drinking, dancing, banquetting."

They sang and sought their myrtle shades again,
While sweet adieus prolong'd the parting strain.
Their eyes reverted, beam'd lascivious fires
Upon the Knight and kindled wild desires.

Towards the palace, silent and alone
The hero mov'd &mdash; afar the fabric shone
Like gorgeous clouds that throng the setting sun:
But ere he reach'd that palace, huge and bright,
A glorious scene detain'd the wond'ring Knight&mdash;
A pearly river!  whose melodious tide
Lav'd golden shores!  whose banks were beautified
With trees wide-waving, paradisian bow'rs
And all the gaudy multitude of flow'rs
That on Spring's lap the liberal Flora show'rs.
This stream, dividing, roll'd its branches twain,
In circling sweep around a flow'ry plain,
Thro' vocal groves, then fondly met again.
The Islet fair, so form'd, arose between,
With dome-like swell, array'd in richest green.
So fair it was, so smooth, so heavenly sweet,
It seem'd made only for angelic feet.

On this green Isle the splendid Palace stood,
And rainbow bridges arch'd the pearly flood&mdash;
A fairer bow fair Juno ne'er display'd
In vernal skies, tho' not, like Juno's, made
Of subtile sun-beams, but of solid gems,
Such as adorn imperial diadems.
Its blue was solid sapphire.  Its gay green
Was massy emerald.  The ruby sheen
Form'd its bright curve of rich and rosy red;
Its yellow hue the golden Topaz shed.
Seem'd either end on snow-white clouds to lie&mdash;
They were not clouds, but sculptur'd ivory!
And now a bugle breath'd a silver sound,
Whose notes with soft reverberations, round
Rang sweet and long; now silently unfold
The diamond gates on hinge of polish'd gold;
And now rode out a fairy cavalcade
In order'd march, with banners bright display'd,
With diamond lances and with golden helms,
And shields of gold emboss'd with sparkling gems,
Advanc'd the pageant; proud beneath each knight,
O'er grassy levels pranc'd their steeds milk-white,
Whose ivory hoofs in glitt'ring silver shod,
With nimble grace on blushing flow'rets trod.
Prancing they came, and as the trumpets blew,
They neigh'd for pride and arch'd their necks of snow;
Toss'd their proud heads indignant of the rein,
Champ'd their foam'd bits and paw'd the trembling plain;
Warrior and steed array'd for battle shone;
Whose burnish'd mail and bright caparison
Illum'd, far round, the flow'r-enwoven field,
And restless splendours flash'd from shield to shield.
Loud in the van the wreathed bugle spoke,
Till woods and floods with martial clamours shook.
High in the midst, enring'd by many a knight,
And thron'd conspicuous on his chariot bright,
Rode Oberon forth, in proud, imperial state,
And, by his side, his queen Titania sate.
In proud procession the refulgent host
O'er the gay bridge, the pearly river cross'd;
The rain-bow arch beneath the measur'd tread
Of prancing steeds, harmonious clangour made.

Now when Rinaldo saw his impious foe
Towards him, advancing in triumphant show;
With shield up-rais'd and ready spear he stood,
For sudden fury fir'd the hero's blood.
The host drew near him; not with threat'ning mien,
But aspect courteous, placid and serene,
While thus the king th' undaunted Knight address'd&mdash;
"To Fairy Land, thrice welcome, god-like guest!
Our warlike ostentation, gallant Knight,
Appears to pay thee honour, not to fight;
Then stay that lifted thunder-bolt!  for here
Truth, virtue, valour, need no danger fear.
Behold!  for thee our palace gates expand
And Oberon welcomes thee to Fairy Land.
Thither with us repair, exalted Knight!
And what my realm can furnish, to delight,
The god-like mind, or sensual appetite,
Awaits thee there." &mdash; In sullen, silent mood,
With looks contemplative the hero stood&mdash;
"If I assault" (he said) "that peaceful host,
Th' event is doubtful and th' advantage lost
Of peaceful artifice, which oft prevails
Our aims to compass ev'n when vict'ry fails;
Nay, if attack'd, these phantoms may disperse,
And make my very victory a curse,
Since they alone th' important secret know,
Of Crystalina's residence below&mdash;
Perhaps, enchanted, she is doom'd to dwell,
In some remote, impenetrable cell;
Perhaps transform'd, like Niobe, to stone,
In some moist grot the virgin weeps alone
Or chang'd, like Daphne, to a laurel fair,
She stands in speechless, comfortless despair;
Or, like sad Clytie, a sunflow'r made,
Decays and droops her melancholy head;
Perhaps a nightingale, perhaps a dove,
She fills, with plaintive melody, the grove,
And some kind Fairy, haply, may relate
To me, her mournful and mysterious fate."&mdash;
The prudent Knight, with these reflections, (sway'd
By policy, not fear,) his foe obey'd.
Now o'er the bridge and thro' the portals wide
Encompass'd round with military pride,
He pass'd majestic and their pow'r defied.
And now, an area vast before him shone,
With pavements rich, of pearl and precious stone.
The Palace too, magnificent and proud,
Stupendous fabric!  fair before him stood:
Compar'd with which th' elaborate structures, fram'd
By human hands &mdash; cathedrals, temples fam'd,
And Palaces of oriental kings,
And domed mosques, were vain and vulgar things.
Sublime it rose, with minarets and tow'rs,
And diamond domes, and turrets, bath'd in show'rs
Of saffron light, and, rais'd pre-eminent,
Tall Cupolas that propp'd the firmament!
And, lifted high on stately Colonade,
(With richest carvings flourish'd and portray'd,)
Balconies bright and galleries of gold&mdash;
Rinaldo saw the gorgeous doors unfold;
And entering slow, survey'd with rapt'rous gaze,
Of garnish'd halls a labyrinthine maze.
And fair arcades and alleys, where his eye
Rov'd to and fro in sweet perplexity.
A central hall, of amplitude sublime,
Receiv'd him, ravish'd with the dulcet chime
Of timbrels, lyres, and dulcimers, whose sound,
In floods of music all his senses drown'd;
And there the monarch and his splendid queen
Assum'd their throne of gold and em'rald green.
That hall, so grand, so exquisitely fair,
The Knight survey'd and all the wonders there.
A thousand pillars, all of ivory,
Adorn'd with wreaths and fairest imag'ry,
And pedestals, and capitals sublime,
Surmounted by entablature divine;
With cornice, frize, and architrave of gold,
Of Doric, Gothic, and Corinthian mould&mdash;
A thousand pillars gracefully upbore
A vaulted ceiling, fram'd of sapphire pure&mdash;
A mimic firmament!  whereon the moon,
Full-orb'd, and glitt'ring constellations shone.
A carpet rich, of grassy hue, o'erlaid
The spacious floor, with woven flow'rs portray'd,
And rais'd thereon, bloom'd artificial bow'rs
Of sculptur'd gold, o'ercanopied with flow'rs,
And leaves metallic, that appear'd to bloom,
And gave a sylvan aspect to the gorgeous room.
Beneath those bowrets silken sofas stood,
On which fair maids, in wanton attitude,
Reclin'd, like roses bent with vernal dew,
Their foam-white bosoms heaving to the view.
And here and there transparent fountains play'd,
Cool'd all the air, and pleasant murmurs wade,
Whose glitt'ring cascades, that unceasing rain'd,
An ample vase of purest pearl contain'd,
O'erflowing never, but for ever full,
For ever limpid, and for ever cool.
Nor was there not proud statuary there,
Of harness'd heroes and of ladies fair;
Nor rich pavillions dawning on the eyes;
Alcoves of gold with pictur'd canopies,
Where gods to slumber might forsake the skies;
Besides whatever Imitation's art,
And bold creative Fancy could impart
To rich materials; for Sculpture there
Had carv'd her fancies, intricately fair,
With subtlest hand, on stones and metals rare.
But wherefore strive, with inexpressive rhyme,
And tuneless words to paint this scene sublime!
Romantic fancy, nor Elysian dream,
E'er fram'd so fair, so exquisite a scene;
And ne'er shall words portray so rare a sight,
Though Shakspeare pen, and Ogilvie recite.
But ah!  this proud profusion, this display
Of all things rich, and beautiful, and gay,
Not long engag'd Rinaldo's restless eye,
That gaz'd in vain his captive love to spy.
Though maids as fair (but fairer could not be)
Around him frolick'd, all unpleas'd was he;
He sigh'd, he frown'd, impatient to depart,
Said seek, elsewhere, the lady of his heart.
But lo!  in state magnificent, uprear'd,
A spacious table suddenly appear'd
Where golden fruits in silver baskets smil'd,
Where dews nectareous, cull'd from blossoms wild,
And all delicious rarities were plac'd,
That e'er the board of eastern monarch grac'd.
For me, vain bard!  in feeble days who dwell,
O!  'twere the labour of an age to tell
Each dainty dish of food delectable,
That on this spacious, splendid table lay,
Num'rous as stars that gem the milky way.
But spread in vain was this superb repast,
And vainly-round were seats of ivory plac'd.
Ev'n from the sight the cautious hero turn'd,
And, oft invited, oft the banquet spurn'd.
Scarce had he turn'd, when, pleasant to behold,
Delicious wines, in cups of purest gold,
All mantling stood; the which, a smiling maid,
With lily hand, reach'd forth and sweetly said&mdash;
"Drink, weary Knight, and I will drink with thee;
I kiss the cup &mdash; O!  drink and happy be:
Thy bosom then with endless joy shall glow,
Nor pain, nor trouble, longer shalt thou know,
But rove with us through Pleasure's flowr'y mead,
Recline on down, and on ambrosia feed.
Drink, gallant Knight!  and follow, follow me,
For I have deck'd a fragrant couch for thee.
Fair is the gilded chamber, heavenly fair
The crimson curtains that shall hide us there;
And fair the silken canopy above,
Pictur'd with scenes of wantonness and love.
There on a bank, beside a crystal stream,
Adonis dallies with the Cyprian Queen;
There you may lovely Danae behold,
And Jove descending in a show'r of gold:
And there Diana, with her nymphs appear,
All sportive, bathing in a fountain clear;
While young Acteon gazes from a tree,
With fearful joy and eager ecstacy.
And there is Mars, in lawless dalliance laid,
With blushing Venus on a sumptuous bed,
Ensnar'd by Vulcan, and with shame o'erspread:
The Gods around them mock their shameful plight
And shake the roofs with clamorous delight."
She ceas'd, but still her moist, lascivious eye,
More strongly plead, and many an am'rous sigh,
Swell'd her voluptuous bosom to his view&mdash;
Whose heaving orbs appear'd like melting snow.
Her glowing hand his glowing hand did press,
And from her forehead many a golden tress
Fell on the panting bosom of the Knight,
Whose fetter'd eyes grew dizzy at the sight.
And still she sigh'd, still whisper'd "come away!"
And coyly pointing to her chamber gay,
With, fond compulsion, tenderly essay'd,
To urge the hero to her am'rous bed.
As thus he stood, the Spirit's warning came
Swift o'er his mind and brac'd his yielding frame.
Backward he shrunk, and gazing for awhile
On his fair foe, he half excus'd her guile,
And his dark frown was gilded with a smile.
With feeble effort he essay'd to speak,
Essay'd, in vain, from her dear arms to break,
His voice too languid and his limbs too weak.
But when the mem'ry of his captive maid
Rush'd on his soul, he started back dismay'd;
Now curs'd his passions, now the Fairy's charms,
And shook the lovely phantom from his arms.
"Away!  fair fiend!  nor dare to tempt me more!"
The Knight exclaim'd, and sought the Palace door;
When lo!  a mighty army he descried,
Stretch'd o'er the plain, beyond the pearly tide&mdash;
Shields, helms, and ensigns glitter'd from afar,
And all the dreadful pageantry of war.
Steeds neigh'd, and trumpets blowing fierce and strong,
With martial rage inflam'd th' embattled throng.
Gloomy and rough became the pearly flood,
And foam'd and thunder'd thro' the echoing wood;
The bridge gave way, and, with tremendous sweep,
The wreck roll'd glittering down the gloomy deep!
The Knight beheld with fierce and fearless eye
And, in defiance, shook his spear on high.
Then to the throne of Oberon he press'd
With dauntless step, and thus the fiend address'd&mdash;
"Inform'd and aided by enchantments high,
I scorn your friendship and your hate defy.
And briefly know, perfidious Oberon,
I now for captive Crystalina come;
That royal virgin whom with impious hand
You basely stole, and forc'd to Fairy Land.
Avoid my wrath, restore the captive fair&mdash;
His arm can much, whose soul so much can dare."

Scarce had he ceas'd when instant thunder broke
Upon his ear!  the stable Palace shook;
The monarch vanish'd; fled the fairy crew
Like unsubstantial shadows from his view.
The loos'ned ceiling and the crackling wall,
Asunder turn, in heap'd confusion fall&mdash;
Amid the rushing ruins stood the Knight,
And shrunk aghast from the tremendous sight.
The pompous fabric thunder'd to the ground,
With crashing fury, and enclos'd him round&mdash;
Heaps upon heaps the splendid ruins lay,
Ev'n in destruction lamentably gay.
The Knight, o'erwhelm'd, as by a mighty flood,
Still undestroy'd amid destruction stood;
Though pond'rous rocks o'er head, and all around,
His dungeon made, where deepest darkness frown'd
Unhappy youth!  on Oberon's shatter'd throne,
In majesty unenvied, he sat down
In calm despair &mdash; his hopes and fears were lost,
His settled soul no restless passion tost.
There as he sat, what mournful visions stole
Upon his tranquil though despondent soul!
Much he reflected on the state of man&mdash;
His life a bubble and his days a span;
On ruin'd kingdoms and on beggar'd kings,
And vanity of sublunary things.
There mem'ry show'd him his once happy state,
And with his past, compar'd his present fate.
O!  once how happy!  but how wretched now!
Once how exalted!  now, alas, how low
These sad reflections patiently he bore&mdash;
"Heaven's will be done!" he said, and said no more.
But when the mem'ry of his captive Fair,
The griefs and she was doom'd to bear,
Rush'd on his soul, enrag'd the hero rose,
And groaning deep, proclaim'd his racking woes.
His groans were answer'd by loud laughter near&mdash;
Alas!  how grating to a mournful ear!
And clank of chains, and gnash of iron teeth,
And whet of daggers, and the gasping breath
Of dying men; while, glowing through the gloom,
Red eye-balls glar'd, like meteors in a tomb.
At length a voice, more terrible and loud
Than bursting thunder from a midnight cloud,
Assail'd his ears &mdash; "Presumptuous man!  I bring
The clement mandate of the Fairy King.
He offers life, he offers liberty,
If from his empire instantly you flee&mdash;
Renounce your rash adventure, and resign
Your spear and shield and crucifix divine,
As trophies of his conquest &mdash; which demand,
By you rejected, hear his dread command:&mdash;
A thousand years within that dungeon deep,
Mad Knight!  remain, in solitude to weep,
Devoid of light, of food, of balmy sleep
Each day with direst tortures to be slain,
And still revive each day, to die again."

"Back to your king!" replied the champion bold,
"Say, you his clement purpose did unfold,
In suited terms of insolence and pride&mdash;
Then say, his fearless captive thus replied:&mdash;"
The hero spake, and rush'd, with forward spear,
Towards the fiend, rejoic'd a foe was near.
The phantom vanish'd, but a pond'rous rock
Receiv'd the magic steel's impetuous shock.
Then, strange to tell!  the rocky pile became
A mass of rushing waters, and amain
To the contiguous river roll'd away!
The Knight, restor'd to freedom and to day,
Around him gaz'd in mute astonishment,
And to the lake his mournful journey bent.
The fairy hosts had vanish'd from the plain,
The bridge appear'd, the flood grew calm again.
His pathless way was through a smiling grove,
Where heaven's own angels might delight to rove;
Around him play'd the aromatic breeze,
And mellow warblings fill'd the shady trees.
On every bough elysian blossoms blow'd,
On every tree Hesperian fruitage glow'd.
The orange stoop'd his fruit-encumber'd head,
Reclining boughs their golden apples shed,
And, at his feet, the vine rich clusters spread;
Whilst over all, the golden, concave sky
Pour'd down its yellow radiance from on high,
And fill'd with light the green, melodious grove,
Where all was richness, loveliness, and love.

At length, before the mournful hero's way,
The silver lake, in halcyon slumber lay;
Encircled round with gay-green, bow'ry trees,
That wav'd their gilded summits in the breeze,
And o'er the smooth deep stretch'd their slender arms,
As if love-sick with their reflected charms&mdash;
So of the fair Narcissus it is sung,
How o'er the crystal rivulet he hung,
View'd his fair visage in the polish'd tide,
Woo'd his own shade, and, self-enamour'd, died.
But warbling birds, smooth lakes, nor bloomy trees,
Rinaldo's anxious, woe-worn soul could please.
Along the shore, whose sands were pearl and gold,
Forlorn he rov'd, oft pausing, to behold.
Of that pure lake, the crystal depths serene,
And shining bottom, pav'd with pebbles clean;
And many a golden fish, whose glitt'ring side
Illum'd the wat'ry depths and beautified.
While here he rov'd a troop of damsels fair,
With green apparel and with golden hair,
Approach'd the shore &mdash; their limbs they disarray'd,
And all their secret, hidden charms display'd;
Their heaving breasts, their tap'ring arms he saw,
And slender waists, more white than new-fall'n snow.
The shores with joyous acclamations rang,
As in the flood the playful damsels sprang:
Upon their beauteous bodies, with delight,
The billows leapt.  O!  'twas a pleasant sight
To see the waters dimple round for joy,
Climb their white necks and on their bosoms toy;
Like snowy swans, they vex'd the sparkling tide,
Till little rainbows danc'd on ev'ry side.
Some swam, some floated, some on pearly feet
Stood sidelong, smiling exquisitely sweet;
Down their white waists their golden tresses flow,
Like evening sun-beams on a bank of snow.
And now the fairest, with mellifluous tongue,
Thus hail'd the Knight &mdash; "O, stranger, fair and young,
Throw, throw thy mail and shining arms aside,
And bathe with us in this translucent tide.
Then will thy skin more beautiful appear
Than snow, or snow-white pearls that glitter there.
The silvery waves, that o'er us sweetly roll,
Will brace thy limbs and fortify thy soul:
So thou the hearts of ladies fair may'st gain,
And move the mightiest on the fields of fame;&mdash;
Come gallant Knight!  'tis sweet with us to play
On this soft flood, and raise the sparkling spray
In am'rous wrestle and diversions gay.
Ah!  wherefore linger?  Has some earthly queen
Bewitch'd thine eye?  Or rather hast thou seen
Thy loveliest self, of all thy lovely race,
And scorn'st all others for thy matchless face?
O!  if thou hast, be mindful of the fate
Of fair Narcissus, nor be wise too late."

The Knight replied: &mdash; "Seducing, cunning fair!
Whose smiles seraphic and soul swaying air
Almost persuade me to obey and die,
Forgiveness deign if I your pray'rs deny.
Had Philomel your tuneful tongue possess'd,
Its music so had ravish'd Tereus' breast,
(Its music, which might lull the tempest's rage,)
He ne'er had torn it from its ivory cage.
But well I know that tongue is false as sweet,
And therefore shun its eloquent deceit.
But O!  your sweet temptations still display&mdash;
Float o'er the waves and round me closer play;
Spread your gold tresses on the crystal flood,
And try each sweet, lascivious attitude.
Though I may not your pleasant sports partake,
Quaff your rich wine nor swim your silver lake,
Nor love indulge in your voluptuous arms,
O!  tempt me still with all your fatal charms."

He ceas'd:  and now a female shriek be hears;
Now in the grove a flying maid appears!
Behind her close an eager youth pursues,
Whose ruddy face with fire libid'nous glows.
With out-stretch'd arms he almost grasps his prize;
The damsel pants, and shrieks, and shrieking flies.
And fills the grove with lamentable cries;&mdash;
"Stay, cruel youth!  a spotless virgin spare
Is there no help? &mdash; unfeeling youth forbear!"
The gallant Knight the maids distress survey'd&mdash;
"Forbear!" he cried, and couch'd his magic blade.
The clouds of wrath o'erspread his dusky brow,
And from his eyes, the lightning flash'd below.
With whirlwind fury, on the dastard knight
Rinaldo rush'd &mdash; but now, in matchless flight,
The fleet-foot damsel reach'd the silver lake,
And in its waters plung'd with piteous shriek;
But, closer still, the kindling ravisher,
Behind her press'd and clasp'd the struggling fair.
For help, for mercy, many a pray'r she sends,
And tow'rds the shore her pleading hand extends;
In his fierce arms her beauteous body writhes,
More faint she cries, more pantingly she breathes,
And feebly calls on brave Rinaldo's name,
To save her spotless chastity from shame.
"And where &mdash; O!  where is now the gallant youth,
The shield of beauty, innocence, and truth?
And does he shrink, or view with heedless eye
Vice triumph thus, and pleading Virtue die&mdash;?"
Upon the strand the hero stood amaz'd,
And on the pair in silent horror gaz'd;
But soon grew calm the tumult of his breast,
And thus the treach'rous fairies he address'd:
"Deceitful fiends!  behold, and blush to see
How vain your wiles and wicked sorcery!
Full well I know how that enchanting lake,
From manly limbs their energy will take;
Unbrace the arm, and, to the warlike heart,
A trembling imbecility impart.
O!  had I not th' infernal cunning known,
Not that clear lake, not fiery Phlegethon,
Nor raging seas had check'd my progress on."
Rinaldo ceas'd, when terrible to view,
The am'rous pair two hideous monsters grew!
They shriek'd, they fled; and all th' Elysian scene
Before him vanish'd like an airy dream.
The grove, the lake, the arch of radiant gold,
Swift from his view, as the red lightning, roll'd,
Which is, and is not, ere a moment flies&mdash;
Meanwhile thick glooms and howling whirlwinds rise
And vast volcanoes shake the region dread,
And sounds tremendous thunder o'er his head&mdash;
Such dreadful sounds as jar the pond'rous globe,
When heaven's sulphureous magazines explode,
And shoot their flaming thunder-bolts abroad.

The Knight, in pale astonishment and fear,
Propping his tott'ring body with his spear,
Now gazes round &mdash; but nought salutes his eye.
Save the mad meteor bickering on high,
Or baleful fires, that ghastly glimmers throw
On fiery floods and yawning gulfs below;
Or pale-blue gleams, by frantic lightnings shed
On dusky cliffs that totter o'er his head.
But soon the tumults died in murmurs round,
And awful silence fill'd the gloom profound;
When, strange to tell, and heavenly to hear,
Melodious sounds, sublimely high and clear,
Roll'd through the gloom and cheer'd his wond'ring ear.
And lo!  again the golden concave sky
Spread its effulgent canopy on high,
And bow'rs and groves came dancing on his sight,
And all the waters roll'd in saffron light.

