Now morn, ascending from the sparkling main,
Unlock'd her golden magazines of light,
And on the seas and heav'ns cerulean plain
Shower'd liquid rubies; while retreating night,
Far westward wheeling her umbrageous flight,
In other climes her starr'd pavillion spread;
When they descried (O, joy-inspiring sight!)
The Mermaid-Isle, slumb'ring on ocean's bed,
With rosy canopy of low-hung clouds o'erspread.

The marble cliffs, with orange-groves embower'd,
And sunny peaks, and gilded steeples, tower'd
Above the sea &mdash; and now the mingled sound
Of lowing herds; shrill horn by shepherd wound;
The bark of watch-dog, and the whistle shrill
Of plough-boy busy on the sloping hill;
The milk-maid chanting o'er her foamy pail,
The bird's sweet carols from each hill and dale,
Seem'd the blest pair to welcome and to hail.
Th' extatic virgin hurried to the prow,
And towards the island stretch'd her arms of snow,
As if to embrace that dear, that natal land&mdash;
And now they now walk'd the golden strand:
Now kneel'd for joy, and worshipp'd hand in hand.
From hills and dales the neighbouring shepherds flew,
The unknown travellers of the deep to view;
And when the princess and the much lov'd Knight.
Upon the shore, salute their wond'ring sight,
With joyful shouts they rend the echoing air,
And crowd around to hail the happy pair;
Some climb the masts; some climb the neighbouring tree,
And some the rocks, the long lost maid to see&mdash;
"No more!" they cried &mdash; "no more ye shepherds mourn,
But bless your monarch's and your queen's return."
With joy serene the hoary headed Seer,
Survey'd the throng; and while the blissful tear 
O'er his wan cheek unfelt, unheeded fell,
He bless'd the hour he left his lonely cell&mdash;
They climb the banks, and view with happy eye,
Through tow'ring trees, the palace huge and high.
Forward they haste, while each glad shepherd show'rs
Along their path-way odoriferous flow'rs,
And, o'er their heads, green myrtle branches bear,
And leafy palms to shade the princely pair.
Soon as the open palace gate they gain,
The royal parents hear the loud acclaim,
Of joyful swains &mdash; they seek the door amaz'd&mdash;
But when on long-lost Crystaline they gaz'd.
Amid the thronging, shouting multitude,
Transfix'd with glad astonishment they stood.
Their quiv'ring lips, fix'd eyes, and struggling breast,
The pangs of speechless ecstacy express'd.
The Knight and Virgin ran with speechless haste,
And kiss'd their joy-struck parents, and embrac'd.
Mean time the Hermit gaz'd, a he drew nigh,
Upon the king, and traced with happy eye,
Of his old friend the features in his face;
Tho' Time and Care, those features to deface,
His check had furrow'd; kill'd the roses there,
Bow'd his tall frame and bleach'd his auburn hair.
The monarch view'd him, but remember'd not;
Yet as he gaz'd, he felt &mdash; he knew not what
Sensation strange, of rapture and amaze,
Seize on his soul and fix his wond'ring gaze.
His bosom throbb'd, tears gush'd, he knew not why,
And years forgotten fill'd his memory.
With eager looks he grasp'd the Hermit's hand,
And thus saluted happy Altagrand&mdash;
"Welcome!  old man, thrice welcome!  for thou art
Some friend, some old acquaintance, if my heart
Deceive  me not &mdash; O!  say from whence you came?
Say what your native country, and your name?"
"You once did know, once love old Altagrand?"
The Seer replied, and press'd the monarch's hand&mdash;
"Lo!  I am he! &mdash; doubts Armigrand my word?
Does not thus scar, and this &mdash; and this, afford
Unerring proof that I am he, whose shield
Preserv'd thy life on Palestine's hot field?"
"I know thee well!" the king with rapture spoke,
As from the trance of ecstacy he broke&mdash;
"I know thee well!  the bravest Knight thou art
That ever fought, and dearest to my heart.
Just God!  how have I blasphemously blam'd
Your high decree!  how impiously complain'd,
That you had robb'd me of the only gem
That made life precious!  O!  I knew not then
This gem, so precious, was preserv'd, not lost;
Preserv'd mid dangers, an unnumber'd host,
To be restor'd when wish'd and needed most!
But say my friend!  know'st thou this gallant knight,
This lamb in peace, this lion in the fight?"&mdash;
The Seer replied &mdash; "'O!  is he not my son?
Or said he falsely, and am I undone?
If it be false, the previous falsehood hide,
More dear to me than all that's true beside.
If it be false, henceforth let falsehood be
My truth, and truth be falsehood unto me.
A world!  a world to him who shall but prove
This youth the offspring of my wedded love!"&mdash;
The king replied &mdash; "He is!  by earth and hell.
He is thy son, the child of Cristabelle!
From Scotia's realms the gallant boy I bore,
And made him great in council and in war.
Another time, not now, I will relate,
Of thy brave soldier the achievements great;
Then shalt thou sit and drink with eager ear,
Tales of thy son that kings with envy hear;
Yea, thou shalt be more wakeful than the moon,
To hear the warlike actions of thy son;
And, not the wand of Hermes, which could seal
The hundred eyes of Argus, shall prevail
To weary thine &mdash; and thou shalt weep for joy,
And thank the heavens that gave thee such a boy!"

Thus spake the monarch to the anxious Seer,
Confirm'd his hopes and banish'd doubt and fear;
Then all was joy &mdash; promiscuously they greet,
And o'er and o'er, with idle joy, repeat
Glad salutations and embraces sweet.
O!  what a scene of happiness was there
How great a change to transport from despair!
Did not my reader chide my ling'ring muse,
And bid her haste the tedious tale to close,
O!  I could sit from dawn till starry night,
To paint this scene of rapturous delight!
Then ev'n the swains ecstatic joy display'd,
And bless'd aloud the fair angelic maid;
To please her, some their sprightly pipes employ,
Some with glad shouts her tender ears annoy,
Some laugh aloud, and others weep for joy!
But see!  the monarch waves aloft his hand
In sign of silence &mdash; all in silence stand,
While thus (with voice to which unwonted bliss
Gives energy and godlike emphasis,)
He speaks aloud &mdash; "Attend!  ye shepherds all.
Hither in haste my happy subjects call;
Bid rich and poor, (ask not if foe or friend,)
Bid lords and peasants on their king attend;
Bid them bring all their music, and proclaim,
With sound of clarions, in your monarch's name,
To youths and virgins, men and matrons old,
This night a happy festival I hold,
This night resign my daughter and my crown
To brave Rinaldo, knight of high renown.
Fill ye the trumpets with your joy, and shake
The merry church-bells till the isle doth quake;
Let every street with cheerful bonfires gleam,
And every window a constellation seem;
Yea, let it seem (for so your king desires)
That, from heav'ns arch the firmamental fires
Have all descended &mdash; haste ye, haste away,
The king rejoices, let the world be gay."

The crowd, obsequious to his high command,
Spread the glad tidings o'er the happy land;
Some fill'd the trump with clam'rous joy; some shak'd
The merry church-bells till the island quaked;
And scarce had Phoebus from the lovely isle,
Withdrawn, reluctantly, his radiant smile,
And chang'd the billows into molten gold,
Ere you might hear and joyfully behold
Resplendent chariots to the palace roll'd,
In gorgeous state; and pompously array'd,
High blooded dames arriv'd, in grand parade;
While many an amorous, many a martial Knight.
Graceful in hall and terrible in fight,
On foamy steeds that toss'd their manes on high,
Beside them rode with princely gallantry.

Now shone the halls, magnificently shone,
With star-like tapers.  On his ivory throne,
The king was seated by his beauteous queen&mdash;
Conspicuous there, yet blushing to be seen,
With sweet embarrassment and changeful mien.
Beside Rinaldo Crystalina sate,
Pre-eminent in beauty as in state;
And much the hero strove the maid to cheer,
But, whispering pleasant flatteries in her ear,
And tales of love, that best in secret tell,
Increas'd the blush he labour'd to dispel.
Meanwhile the palace and the court resound,
With frantic joy; the foamy bowls go round,
The music wakens, and each youth and maid,
Joins the gay dance and merry masquerade.
But why their vain and idle sports rehearse?
Let loftier themes exalt my humble verse.

Behold!  Rinaldo and the princess stand
Before the white rob'd bishop hand hand!
Their vows exchang'd; the ceremonies
The rapturous Knight the blushing maid embrac'd.
Then Armigrand descending from his throne,
Gave crown and sceptre to his gallant son,
And hail'd him king!  The clam'rous crowd replies,
"Hail!  king Rinaldo!  virtuous, brave, and wise."
While haughty lords and barons crowd his throne,
Salute him monarch and allegiance own.

But Lo!  the Knight in mute abstraction stood,
And now the crown, and now th' assembly view'd;
Then back return'd the sceptre and the crown,
And spake abrupt, with dark portentous frown&mdash;
"Of my adored Crystaline possess'd,
Me you behold with all my wishes blest!
But that it seems the universal voice
Approves, confirms our much lov'd monarch's choice;
But that I deem the public peace demands,
And justice seconds what the king commands,
This crown and sceptre freely I'd resign,
To worthier heads and abler hands than mine&mdash;
Lords!  and ye Knights renown'd in arms, attend,
If my proud honours any here offend;
If there be any by ambition fir'd,
Who to this throne aspire or have aspir'd;
If any here whom hate, or envy moves,
To doubt the ruler whom the King approves,
Or deem my right not lawful; not divine;
Behold!  the regal sceptre I resign,
Till I shall add, by force, in single fight,
The right of conquest to my present right&mdash;
If any, speak!  and let that champion know,
He shall be honour'd as an equal foe&mdash;
Whoever then in combat is o'ercome,
Shall yield the victor the disputed throne,
And civil hosts shall not have bled to gain
For him or me, a brief inglorious reign."

Thus spoke the Knight, with visage stern and bold,
And look'd around some champion to behold,
Who durst adventure for so great a prize:
But all at once applausive shouts arise,
"Long live our king!" (the throng transported cried)
Our king Rinaldo and his royal bride."
The hoary Hermit heard his godlike boy,
With admiration and paternal joy,
And turn'd away to hide his gushing eye.
And now the Hero fill'd his glittering throne,
And took the sceptre and the royal crown:
His happy parents and his well-won bride,
Smiling serene, were seated by his side.
Old Armigrand, inspir'd with  joy and wine,
From his loose locks shook off the snows of time,
Then rose rejoic'd, and thus with boisterous glee.
Broke forth the swelling tide of ectacy.
"Is no one happy here but me?  or whence
This cheerless silence and staid temperance?
Pair, lords and ladies!  wake the drowsy night,
With song and dance, and revels that delight
And stir the youthful spirits; but for me,
Unfit for feats of young activity,
I'll sit me down with Altagrand, and frame
A song of transport; a tumultuous strain."
Thus spoke the King, and seiz'd the Hermit's lyre;
Smil'd on the throng, and struck the thrilling wire.

THE ECSTACY.
I.
Blest be this day above all other days!
Let no dark mist obscure the hills and dales,
Nor cloud the sky's serenity deface;
But softly blow ye aromatic gales!
Ye rolling streams make liquid melody,
And dance into the sea.
Let not rude Boreas, on this halcyon day,
Forth, in his stormy chariot, be whirl'd;
Let not a cloud his raven wings display,
Nor shoot th' oakrending lightnings at the world.
Let Jove, auspicious, from his red right-hand,
Lay down his thunder-brand!  A child
I lost, but two this day have found,
Let the earth shout, and let the skies resound.

II.
Let hoary Time throw down his scythe to-day;
Let him his work of desolation cease,
And on the earth's reviving lace look gay:
Let sea, and air, and earth, repose in peace,
Save when the sounds of universal glee,
Disturb their deep tranquillity.
Let Atropos forego her dismal trade,
And cast her fatal, horrid shears away.
While Lachesis spins out a firmer thread.
Let hostile armies hold a truce to-day,
And grim-fac'd War wash white his gory hand,
And smile around the land.
A child I lost, but two this day have found,
Let the earth shout, and let the skies resound.

III.
Let this day's Night be less like night than day&mdash;
Let it like day in darker dress appear;
Let Venus fair her of Love display
On Jove's blue altar, and let Cynthia fair:
Ride in her silver chariot round the sky,
Leaving Endymion alone to lie.
Let all the stars of influence benign,
This sacred night in heavenly synod meet;
Let Mars and Venus be in happy trine,
And on the wide world look with aspect sweet;
And let the mystic music of the spheres
Be audible to mortal ears.
A child I lost, but two this day I've found,
Then shout, O earth, and thou O sea, resound!
