Beneath a mountain, whose stupendous head
Defied the four winds of the firmament,
A gallant Knight, in glitt'ring arms array'd,
His daring soul on bold adventure bent,
Check'd his proud steed, with smoking foam besprent:
For to!  a cavern in his way appear'd,
Near which a Hermit told his beads intent&mdash;
A mystic sage, for magic pow'rs rever'd&mdash;
Tall was his aged frame and white his waving beard&mdash;

With lowly reverence bow'd the courteous knight,
And thus address'd the hoary anchorite:&mdash;
"Hail, mighty Seer!  think not with purpose rude
I thus invade your holy solitude.
A wretched wanderer in a foreign land,
I seek the sage and reverend Altagrand.
Far in yon vale, recumbent on a rock,
I found a shepherd piping to his flock;
Him having question'd, fearfully he told
That hereabout that necromancer old
Dwelt in his rocky mountain, all forlorn,
Mid hanging cliffs and forests tempest-torn&mdash;
This place, that look and hoary head bespeak
Thyself the venerable man I seek."
"I am that Seer &mdash; this wilderness my borne,&mdash;
And, stately stranger!  whenceso'er you come,
Know that the good, the noble, and the brave,
Are ever welcome to my mountain-cave.
Dismount &mdash; the sun has finish'd his career,
And in the west the signs of storm appear."

Thus spake the Seer; and as Rinaldo sprang
From his tir'd steed, his pond'rous armour rang;
And now the sun o'er occidental seas
Had reach'd the gardens of th' Hesperides.
Where, as he paus'd, his retroverted gaze
Set all the clouds behind him in a blaze;
Which Night, advancing up the eastern sky
In dusky pomp, beheld with sparkling eye&mdash;
Behind the hills she stay'd her ebon car,
Withheld her moon, and muffled every star;
Resign'd her empire to the lingering day,
Silenc'd her owls and call'd her ghosts away.
Slow to his silent, subterranean hall,
The hoary Hermit led the warrior tall.
Huge was his cave, and gloomy to the sight,
Tho' rudely deck'd with petrefactions white;
A magic rock, which glow'd with quenchless fire
Illum'd the dwelling of the hoary sire,
And all around diffus'd a grateful heat
When wintry tempests on the mountain beat.
Upon the wall his rusty armour hung,
And by its side an aged lyre unstrung;
His bed was moss, and pillow there was none,
His seat was marble and his table stone.
But fain to serve and cheer his knightly guest,
The holy father spread the scanty feast;
Talk'd of the glories and the toils of war,
Of Knights heroic and of Ladies fair:
But still Rinaldo pac'd the cavern dread,
With changeful visage and disorder'd tread;
Oft from his cheek he wip'd th' obtrusive tear,
Heav'd the deep groan and grasp'd his quiv'ring spear;&mdash;
Like mad Orestes, whom the furies tore,
Or great Alcides, who on Oeta wore
The poison'd tunic, dipp'd in Nessus' gore.
The hoary Hermit, with paternal eye,
Mark'd in his face the smother'd agony
Which rack'd his soul; and with balsamic words,
Such as to Christians holy writ affords,
Assay'd to sooth the tortures of his heart&mdash;
But what avails the officious surgeon's art,
To oil the wound and not extract the dart?
"Talk not of comfort!" cried th' impatient Knight,
"O!  mock me not with prospects of delight;
Like Tantalus, I pant upon the brink
Of gushing fountains I must never drink.
I find no comfort but in tears and sighs,
No sorrows but in recollected joys.
Yet hear my tale; and tho' thou canst not cure,
'Twill sooth my sorrows to recount them o'er.
Thrice has yon moon her pearly chariot driv'n
Across the starry wilderness of Heav'n,
In lonely grandeur; thrice the morning star
Danc'd on the eastern hills before Hyperion's car,
Since, thee to find, I reach'd this distant shore,
Thy magic aid, and counsel to implore.
A Knight am I, my occupation war,
My home an isle beneath a Southern Star;
Thro' stormy seas, I've sought, three tedious years,
This land renown'd for necromantic Seers;
For well 'tis known, the pow'rs of air and hell,
Obey the wizzard in his magic cell;
That fairy fiends, who hold at midnight-hour
Their moonlight orgies, own his secret pow'r;
That tempests rage, obedient to his wand,
And spectres rise and sepulchres expand;
Such magic pow'r my wretched state demands,
And such I seek, O Hermit!  at thy hands;
If Knighthood ever to thy heart was dear,
Attend my story with propitious ear;
For tho' thou scorn'st man's dignities and names,
His grief is sacred, and attention claims."
"Unfold thy tale" &mdash; the gray wand-bearer cried&mdash;
"My aid to virtue never was denied,
Nor e'er can be, with knighthood when allied:
For arms and knighthood still my thoughts engage,
Tho' bleach'd these locks with seventy winters' rage.
Oh!  I have seen contending armies close,
With horrid shock; seen knights to knights oppose
Their clanging shieids, and mix their deadly blows!
And I have fought, and heroes of renown
In tournament and battle overthrown."&mdash;
(Fir'd by the thought, the old man show'd his scars,
Receiv'd in old and memorable wars;
O'er his white check the sudden crimson flies,
And martial joy relumes his faded eyes.
With eager grasp Rinaldo's hand he took,
And fired with sympathetic ardour spoke:
"Unfold thy sorrows, and if magic spell,
If incantations horrible and fell,
That rive the tomb, and sway the pow'rs of hell,
Can aught avail thy purpose to fulfil,
Command my counsel and my utmost skill&mdash;"
"Sage Father!" (thus the grateful youth began,
And bow'd obsequious to the hoary man)
"Far in the sea, beneath a heav'n serene,
An island smiles for ever fair and green&mdash;
In that fair island happiest shepherds rove,
And, save the sweet inquietudes of love,
No troubles know; but under pendent rocks,
With mellow pipes enchant their list'ning flocks.
There Armigrand, a pious monarch, reigns,
And o'er the Isle a gentle sway maintains:
To him his beauteous Isabella bore
The blooming, virtuous princess I adore,
Fair Crystalina, whom we call'd erewhile
The tutelary angel of our Isle.
Whose name's in every heart, on every tongue,
The warrior's watchword and the shepherd's song;
Who rul'd unconscious, wheresoe'er she went,
The happy shepherds &mdash; rul'd omnipotent&mdash;
Her smile and frown, reward and punishment.

"I lov'd the maid; her virgin hand I sought,
But sighs, nor tears, nor pray'rs avail'd me aught.
Thus spake the fair &mdash; 'Woulds't thou my hand obtain,
Woo me, Rinaldo, on th' embattled plain,
Thou hast my heart, but there my hand must gain.'
For Glory, then, in foreign fields I fought,
Saw thrones demolish'd; kings to ruin brought;
Pluck'd laurel-wreaths in Danger's bloody path:
Mock'd pain, and grew familiar with grim death.
The wars now o'er, I sought the Mermaid Isle
To claim the prize of all my pain and toil.
Sweet was the hour I left the foreign strand,
And spread the sail to seek that blessed land.
Then all my perils, all my cares were o'er,
My fears behind me, and my hopes before;
While stars unclouded and propitious gales
Our voyage guided, and impell'd our sails.
The green-clad isle I soon and safely found,
With joy elated and with glory crown'd;
I climb'd the cliffs, I pass'd the fragrant grove,
And reach'd the splendid palace of my love;
On spire and turret glanc'd the setting sun,
And the proud pile in all its glory shone,
While groves of myrtle glimmer'd on my sight,
And from their foliage shook a quiv'ring light.
But perch'd beneath I saw a widow'd dove,
Whose plaintive wailings sadden'd all the grove;
I saw an eagle on the flock descend,
Seize a while lambkin and in pieces rend;
And from the bare bough of a mould'ring oak,
A raven hail'd me with portentous croak!
Sad signs!  that like an unexpected cloud,
On Hope's fair prospects cast a frightful shroud.
Then all seem'd sad, tho' lovely to my eye,
I trembled, sigh'd, and wept, I scarce knew why;
The wild-bird's warblings, musical and clear,
Seem'd mournful dirges to my list'ning ear,&mdash;
But on I hurried thro' the palace gate,
Defied adversity, and challeng'd fate.

"And nov the King came forth with tott'ring haste,
With, temples gray, and pale disorder'd face&mdash;
'Welcome, Rinaldo, to thy home and friend!'
He feebly spake, and reach'd his trembling hand;
Cold was that hand, and pale his aged cheek,&mdash;
And thrice he strove, but strove in vain, to speak.&mdash;
'Ah why,' I cried, 'that sad portentous mien?
How fares thy daughter? &mdash; how my gracious queen?'
Then gush'd his tears, and suddenly arise
Convulsive sobs and suffocating sighs&mdash;
While sad and slow his mournful hall we sought,
My soul with dreadful expectation fraught;
With hope and fear's alternate sway I shook,
As round the hall I cast a frantic look.
There Isabella pour'd her melting moan,
And wrung her white hands, tearful and alone.
As Aetna, swoln with sulph'rous vapour, quakes,
Then, as a cloud surcharg'd with thunder, breaks,
Convuls'd with grief, my lab'ring bosom burst&mdash;
O!  wretched state!  O, destiny accurs'd!
And is she gone; for ever gone, I said,&mdash;
O, is my love, my Crystalina dead?&mdash;
'Kind heav'n forbid!' the mournful King replies,
Clasps his pale hands and lifts his suppliant eyes,
'But she is gone &mdash; alas!  we know not where,
And we are left the victims of despair.
Nine days have pass'd, nine sad and tedious days,
Since last I saw my Crystalina's face;
In ev'ning's sweet and tranquil hour, the maid
In yon gay garden unattended stray'd,
As oft she did, to spend the sultry hours,
In breezy groves and paradisian bow'rs&mdash;
I saw her go, and gaz'd with fond delight,
Till clust'ring flow'rs conceal'd her from my sight;
Yea, still I gaz'd, and thought the flow'ry way,
Where she had walk'd, grew lovelier and more gay:
Among the arbours and the pleasant bow'rs,
With wood-bine shaded and perfum'd with flow'rs,
I heard her voice &mdash; how soft!  how sweetly wild!
With secret joy I list'ned and I smil'd,
And thank'd th' Eternal for so sweet a child.
But night came on; the hollow winds 'gan roar,
And Crystalina &mdash; she return'd no more.
No more I'll hear her voice!  no more behold
Her eyes of azure and tier locks of gold,&mdash;
Ah!  who remains my sorrows to assuage,
And cheer the dismal solitude of age,
To scatter roses on the dreary path,
That leads me down to darkness and to death?
O fly my son,' (the afflicted father said,)
'Explore the Isle &mdash; the world, &mdash; to find the maid!
Let her once more in these fond arms recline,
And be our wealth, our crown, the Princess thine.'
Scarce had he spoke, when frantic with despair,
I spurr'd away to seek the royal fair.
O'er many a mountain, many a plain and dell,
Where tigers prowl and fierce hyena's yell;
Where'er the loot of mortal man has trode,
Or wild-beasts made their horrible abode;
In cities throng'd, in wilderness forlorn,
From morn till night, from night till cheerless morn
With sleepless toil and unremitting pain,
I sought the maid, but sought, alas!  in vain.
At length I heard that in this wizzard land,
Hous'd in deep caverns, scoop'd by Nature's hand;
Where mountains huge the rushing storms deride
And turn the glancing thunder-bolts aside,
A race repos'd in awful solitude,
With magic pow'rs by Heav'n or Hell endued.
Therefore I brav'd the wide tempestuous sea,
And pierc'd this bowling wilderness to thee.
Then tell, thou hoary necromancer, tell
If still she lives &mdash; O!  say if ill or well!
Tho' watch'd by Argus; by enchantments bound,
And girt by walls of Adamant around,
I'll set her free, or in the effort fail&mdash;
Speak hoary Hermit, and inform me all."&mdash;
Thus spake Rinaldo to the mighty Seer,
Of Sky's fam'd isle, in cavern deep and drear!

The Seer sat mute and awfully serene,
With light prophetic shone his haggard mien:
He mov'd not; breath'd not; but with steadfast eye
He seem'd to hold communion with the sky,
And pierce the depths of dim futurity.
But soon he started from his frightful trance
And seiz'd his wand!  Rinaldo seiz'd his lance,
But blush'd anon and chid his hasty fear,
And false suspicion of the holy Seer.
Thrice with his wand the Hermit smote the ground,
And thrice the earth return'd a hollow sound;
Then yawning wide, forth stream'd a livid flame,
And in the midst a fiery demon came.
Hell-black he stood, and fearful to behold!
Fiercely around his fiery eye-balls roll'd,
Like shouting meteors in a dusky glen,
Or rush-lights hovering o'er an oozy fen;
Ghastly he grinn'd; unsheath'd his talons bare,
Writh'd his huge frame and shook his snaky hair;
Flapp'd his black wings and brush'd the creeping flame
From his grim face and Salamander frame;
Then with hoarse voice the horrid Demon spake&mdash;
"Why call'st thou MAHU from the brimstone Lake?"
The Seer replied &mdash; "I charge thee by this wand,
List and obey thy master's dread command.
A monarch's daughter, Crystalina fair,
Her father's comfort and his only heir,
Has strangely vanish'd; has been sought in vain
Thro' all the world, with peril and with pain.
Fly, Fiend!  I charge thee find that royal fair,
Then back return and her abode declare&mdash;
That you may know her, take this magic ring,
The perfect emblem of each perfect thing:
The potent charm on each fair finger place&mdash;
On hands impure 'twill seem a metal base,
On some 'tis silver; and on some 'tis lead;
But on the finger of the royal maid,
And her's alone, remember!  you'll behold
From basest metal, 'twill be chang'd to gold&mdash;
Fly, Demon, fly!" &mdash; Thus spake the dreadful Seer,
And horrid echoes fill'd the cavern drear.
The phantom fled; quick clos'd the yawning ground,
And earthquakes shook the wilderness profound;
The mountain reel'd, and from its tossing head
Th' affrighted tiger and the wild-wolf fled,
Whilst loosen'd rocks came tumbling from on high,
And blazing meteors shot athwart the sky.

Awhile, the Seer with stem, unalter'd face,
Survey'd, unmov'd, the horrors of the place;
Then from the wall his aged harp he took&mdash;
String after string with solemn hand he strook.
With low, wild prelude, gently he began,
And o'er the chords with careless fingers ran;
But when Rinaldo lean'd his anxious ear,
The old man's magic minstrelsy to hear,
With bolder hand the necromantic sage
Wak'd loftier tones, and rous'd poetic rage,
Till on the harp, impatient of control,
Impetuous rush'd the tempest of his soul&mdash;
So from some mountain's high and hoary brow,
A loosen'd crag starts silently and slow,
But gaining force, snore furiously it bounds,
The mountain thunders and the vale resounds&mdash;
The vaulted roof and dark recesses rung,
As wildly thus the hoary minstrel sung.

1.
On sweet May-eve, when groves were green,
And wild birds chanted merrily,
When the air was calm, the sky serene,
It was a lady of high degree,
And she sat under a green-wood tree.

2.
O!  she waited there for her dear knight,
But the sun had set, the birds were mute,
The dark wolf howl'd on the mountain height:
The raven croak'd, the owl did hoot,
And pale-red meteors round her shoot.

3.
O!  oft she gaz'd and oft she sigh'd;
Oft list'ned for Alonzo's tread&mdash;
"Why tarries thus my love?" she cried&mdash;
The hour, th' appointed hour has fled,
The night-dew chills my houseless head.

4.
"Ah!  why did I believe his tale,
And leave my father's castle gay,
To meet him in this secret vale?
Or why, ah!  why does Alonzo stay?
'Tis night and the castle is far away!

5.
"But hark!  a distant voice I hear!&mdash;
'Tis not my love, but the night owl's cry"&mdash;
Thus wails Syrenna, wild with fear;
Her raven-locks on the night-winds fly.
Her breath is quick and her heart beats high.

6.
Now the sky grew black, the winds blew loud,
The light'ning gleam'd on the dusky vale
And Thunder spoke from his deep-blue cloud&mdash;
Up rose Syrenna, wild and pale,
And shriek'd and fled thro' the stormy gale&mdash;

7.
But when she reach'd a lonely glade,
Where wild-briars rude and thistles stood,
A ghastly fiend her eyes survey'd!
It beckon'd her to a gloomy wood&mdash;
"'Tis my love!" she cried &mdash; and swift pursued.

8.
It led the maid to a cavern deep!
But on the gulf the light'ning glar'd,
Before she took the fatal leap!
The spectre laugh'd and disappear'd&mdash;
But the Benshie's fatal scream she heard.

9.
And she heard, in her ear, a death-bell toll,
And the raven croak on a blasted tree&mdash;
The Lord have mercy on her soul!
It was a piteous sight to see
The sorrows of that sweet lady.

10.
And now a-down that dusky glen
She saw, she chas'd the fell rush-light&mdash;
It led her to a wat'ry fen,
Then shriek'd, and quench'd its taper bright&mdash;
And all was horror, all was night.

11.
And now strange voices fill the air,
And yells, and shouts both loud and long&mdash;
Ah fly!  ah fly!  distracted fair,
For fierce and fast the fiends come on,
And see!  grim phantoms round thee throng.

12.
Syrenna fled, in vain fled she;
For the ghastly crew met her blasted view,
And a black fiend spoke, and fierce spoke he,
As his arms round her snow-white neck he threw.
"We, lady fair!  are the Elfin crew!"

13.
"Thrice welcome to our merry glen!
And thou shalt be our mistress bright,
And dance with us on the quaking fen,
To the rush-light's red and glimm'ring light,
When tempests howl at dead of night."

14.
They grasp'd her hard by her tender hand,
They dragg'd her away by her raven hair;
Her shrieks were loud, but the ghastly band
To a stormy heath led the lady fair,
And bar'd her breast to the driving air.

15.
On the stormy heath a ring they form;
They place therein the fearful maid,
And round her dance in the howling storm&mdash;
The winds beat hard on her lovely head;
But she clasp'd her hands and nothing said.

16.
O!  'twas, I ween, a ghastly sight,
To see their uncouth revelry;
The lightning was the taper bright,
The thunder was the melody,
To which they danc'd with horrid glee!

17.
The fierce-ey'd owl did on them scowl;
The hat play'd round on leathern wing;
The coal-black wolf did at them howl,
The coal-black raven did croak and sing
And o'er them flap his dusky wing.

18.
An earthquake heav'd beneath their feet;
Pale meteors revel'd in the sky;
The clouds sail'd by like a routed fleet,
The night-winds shriek'd as they pass'd by,
The dark-red moon was eclips'd on high&mdash;

19.  But hark!  what voice, as thunder loud,
Now shakes the wilderness profound?
Whose form appears so tall and proud?
Beneath whose foot-step quakes the ground
And whose bright armour gleams around?

20.
O!  'tis Alonzo true and brave,
And loud he calls on his true-love's name&mdash;
He comes!  he comes the maid to save,
Thro' thunder, lightning, wind and rain,
With buckler broad and sword of flame.

21.
Alonzo spied his lady fair,
He spied her amid that ghastly crew,
And he spurr'd his steed and couch'd his spear&mdash;
But the holy cross on his breast they knew,
And shriek'd, and away like lightning flew.

22.
"And hast thou come?" cried the lady bright&mdash;
"Alonzo comes!" &mdash; the knight replied,
To keep his promise with thee tonight;
For spite of thy father's cruel pride,
Sweet lady!  thou shalt be my bride."

23.
He spoke and mounted his foamy steed,
He took his lady fair behind,
And away he rode to their bridal bed,
More swiftly than the mountain-hind
When the hunter's cry is on the wind.

24.
But all that night rav'd the tempest dire,
A thunder shaft on the castle fell,
Of dark Almanzor, the lady's sire,
And the winds all night rung his castle-bell&mdash;
They rung it loud for Almanzor's knell!

Thus sang the Hermit to his wizard lyre,
With thrilling voice and eyes that sparkled fire.
Thro' all his dark and subterranean halls,
The music rang, and on the dusky walls,
Unearthly phantoms danc'd with frantic air,
Glar'd on the knight and shook their snaky hair.
But when he ceas'd, above, below, around,
Was seen no phantom, and was heard no sound;
Deep silence reign'd &mdash; so still, so deep and dread
That they might hear the Fairy's lightest tread;
Might hear the spider as he wove his snare
From rock to rock, or snails soft-creeping there.
When lo!  a trembling seiz'd the solid earth&mdash;
It yawn'd, and MAHU (horrid form!) came forth.
Sullen he spoke &mdash; "On earth and in the main,
North, south, east, west, on mountain, dale and plain,
Among the living and among the dead
On lightning wings I flew, I sought the maid.
I search'd the palace and the dungeon lone,
The secret desert and the peopled town;
And not alone I search'd the abodes of men,
But the grim lion's and the tiger's den;
Rous'd fierce hyenas from their bloody lair,
And sought in vain thy Crystalina there.
I search'd the church-yard, harbour of the dead!
View'd each cold corpse upon his wormy bed,
In charnel houses, in putrescent tombs;
Amid corruption and horrific glooms.
I search'd the ocean's dark sepulchral waves,
Mid wreckful shoals and rocks and dismal caves,
Where shiver'd ships with all their shining load
The sandy depths of aged ocean strew'd.
There many a grinning skeleton was laid
Whose brainless skull th' unsightly lobster made
His citadel!  oft peering forth, dismay'd
At the huge whales that round about him play'd&mdash;
But by thy wand, O!  Altagrand, I swear,
The maid is not in ocean, earth or air."&mdash;
"Then she's in heav'n!" the frantic lover said,
(And as lie spake the hell-born phantom fled.)
"Say holy Seer!  is all thy magic lore
Exhausted now or hast thou yet in store
Some potent spell which can unite again
The scatter'd atoms of the moulder'd frame?
Or can'st thou not like Endor's witch control
The world of spirits and remand the soul?
O!  if thou canst, exert thy magic might,
And once again restore her to my sight."&mdash;
"Doubt not my pow'r," exclaim'd the Wizard gray&mdash;
"More potent spirits my command obey,
Than swarthy Mahu; spirits of the air,
Who make th' inhabitants of earth their care."

The Hermit paus'd, and from his bosom took
With trembling hand a coal-black magic book;
As from his bosom that black book he drew
Rinaldo saw the spell-struck lamp turn blue;
Shrieks, whispers, groans, and laughter still more dread
The cavern fill'd; and lightning dismal-red,
And bursting thunder shook th' affrighted land,
When first the magic volume did expand.
Far down the vale and up the mountain's height,
Were heard strange sounds of horror and affright,
The lone owl hooted on his wizard oak,
And scream'd the leopard from his cavern'd rock&mdash;
A moment only gaz'd the awful sage,
Upon that wond'rous hieroglyphic page&mdash;
That page replete with cabalistic lore;
Some spell he conn'd of wonder-working pow'r,
Then clos'd it fast, and lo!  the troubled air
And rocking earth grew tranquil, still, and fair.
His ebon wand the awful Hermit took,
And thrice the lyre with gentle hand he shook:
From the touch'd lyre a soft bewilder'd sound,
Of doubtful tones fell murmuring around.

Rinaldo stood enchain'd with sweet surprise,
With ravish'd ears and fascinated eyes,
While from the gleaming lyre distinctly fell,
These warbled words, with sounds angelical&mdash;
The quivering chords, with light mysterious, glow,
And all around a silver lustre throw;
But hark the voice! &mdash; it speaks &mdash; it sweetly sings,
And viewless fingers touch the tuneful strings.
"All in her garden Crystalina lay,
Beneath a bow'r adorn'd with blossoms gay,
And sweetly slumber'd on an evil day;
The luscious woodbine all around her threw
Its fragrant blossoms and ambrosial dew;
On every side nectarean flow'rs were spread;
The plumy birds sang sweetly o'er her head;
While amorous zephyrs, o'er her bosom fair,
Play'd wantonly, and curl'd her golden hair
Flora she seem'd, reposing mid her flow'rs,
Or Venus slumb'ring in Idalian bow'rs.
On either cheek celestial roses shone,
Such as Aurora blushes, when the Sun
At morn, salutes her with a glowing kiss,
And heav'n and earth and ocean smile with bliss.
As thus alone the sleeping virgin lay,
On couch of roses, charm'd with visions gay,
The fairy monarch thither chanc'd to stray.
He saw the maid, and kindling at her charms,
He burn'd to clasp her in his am'rous arms.&mdash;

"And then" &mdash; "what then, dread Spirit of the Lyre?
Rinaldo cried, and shook with madd'ning ire;
And as he spake, up sprang the eager Knight,
Stamp'd the firm earth; and seiz'd his falchion bright:
"To golden climes of subterranean day,
To Fairy land, he bore thy love away.
There fly &mdash; but first these warning words attend&mdash;
On them for safety and success depend.
When threat'ning Phantoms in thy pathway stand.
And rouse the horrors of the Fairy land,
Stand firm, and trust to heav'n and thy right hand;
All threats and dangers fearlessly defy,
But ah!  from kindness and temptation fly.
Guard well thyself &mdash; O!  be to beauty blind,
And leave thine eyes and every sense behind,
Or guard those fatal av'nues to the mind.
Eat not, drink not; of smooth deceit beware:
Be not deluded by a gilded snare,
There, ev'n the tiger hath an outside fair,
And deadliest plants the loveliest blossoms bear.
Beware the damsel's soft, voluptuous bed,
Beware the board with luring dainties spread.
The silver Lake, impetuous hero!  fly,
Where bathing damsels witch the gazing eye:
Secure about thee bear the holy cross,
And wo!  ah, wo to thee, upon its loss!

"Then haste away!  and ere Aurora bright,
From yon tall mountain's oriental height,
Precipitates her cataracts of light,
In Fairy land let brave Rinaldo be,
Where Crystalina weeps and waits for thee."
Now the sweet voice, by rising music drown'd,
Was heard no more; For all above, around,
Celestial music pour'd on every side
From echoing rocks its soft ethereal tide.

With ghastly gaze, awhile the hero stood,
Mutt'ring his wrath, in wild and frenzied mood,
Then, starting fiercely from his horrid trance,
He smote the sounding cavern with his lance,
And thus address'd the awe-inspiring Seer&mdash;
"Let me be gone!  the day is drawing near&mdash;
But say, dread Seer!  where lies this land unknown,
Where I can meet with cursed Oberon?
Tho' midnight darkness shrouds yon mountain hoar,
Point but the way:  Rinaldo asks no more."
The Seer replied &mdash; "First take this holy cross,
And wo!  ah, wo to thee upon its loss!
This buckler broad and glittering helmet take&mdash;
No spear can pierce them, and no force can break.
And take this fatal and unerring spear,
Whose dire enchantments fiends and fairies fear:
'Twas from the moon by fires volcanic thrown,
By furies forg'd and dipp'd in Phlegethon."
"And shall I then" &mdash; (The hero said and frown'd,
And dash'd the proffer'd weapons to the ground,)
And shall Rinaldo, on the martial field,
'Gainst any foes unequal armour wield?
Shall I on magic, not on strength rely?
On arms enchanted, not on bravery?
When did this arm e'er fail on battle-plain,
Or on the foe, this sword descend in vain?
This sword, the old companion of my side,
Faithful and sure, in utmost peril tried.
If thou wouldst add new glory to my name,
Increase the danger, and augment the fame."
"Impetuous Knight!" replied the kindling Sage&mdash;
Think not that I unequal war would wage.
Against the weak I ne'er uplifted shield,
Nor shunn'd the mighty on the martial field.
O!  'twas not thus I fought in Palestine,
My field of fame, if any fame be mine;
When the bald Turk outnumber'd thrice our host,
Yet mourn'd his lame, his fields, and country lost.
But now, no aid can mortal pow'r impart,
Herculean arm, huge spear, or dauntless heart,
For thou art doom'd, proud champion, to oppose
Immortal and invulnerable foes."&mdash;
Thus spake the Seer, and to the silent Knight
He gave the cross, the spear and buckler bright:
Then down the vale, the hermit led the way;
The Knight pursued, impatient of delay:
Dark was that vale, of tall gigantic wood,
The grim abode of elves and beasts of blood;
The couchant tiger scream'd as they pass'd by,
And on them wildly roll'd his meteor-eye!
The wolf sprang frighted from the crackling brake,
And in their pathway coil'd the hissing snake.
High o'er their heads, umbrageous oaks outspread
Their giant arms and awful murmurs made.
Scarce had they reach'd the centre of the vale,
When lo!  black clouds, before a northern gale,
Came sweeping on, and with a dusky veil
Shrouded the moon &mdash; the mountain-tops, oak-crown'd,
Toss'd in the storm and echoed to the sound
Of trees uptorn, and thunders rolling round.
They sat them down beneath an aged oak,
Which, tho' late riven by a thunder-stroke,
Seem'd tempest-proof, and there the fearless Knight
Waited impatient for returning light.

