Hail mighty Love!  Thou all-pervading soul,
Who, God to all things; each to each dost bind.
Mysterious Pow'r!  whose heavenly control
Links orb to orb; binds man to all mankind;
To matter, matter; mind to kindred mind!
Without thee, what were earth and heaven so fair?
A chaos rude, in lawless conflict join'd;
Man would with man, with angel, angel war,
And angry God, o'er all, drive Desolation's car.

By love o'erpower'd, the pair, in sweet embrace;
Forgot all time, and circumstance, and place;
But soon the virgin, from the blissful trance,
Starting awoke, and view'd with frenzied glance,
The spacious hall &mdash; "O fly, dear Knight!" she cried&mdash;
"O fly! &mdash; destruction lurks on ev'ry side.
Hark!  how conflicting winds and waters roar!&mdash;
Defend us heaven!  defend us front the pow'r
Of Fairy Land's grim monarch, or we die&mdash;"
"Fear not!  the monarch of this land am I,"
The Knight replied &mdash; "grim Oberon has fled,
The gate is open, and the dragon dead.
Then take this cross, dear maid, and nothing fear,
My shield's before thee, over thee my spear."
Thus having said, he gave the holy sign,
And, from the palace, led his Crystaline.
They pass'd the gate &mdash; the gate of beaten gold&mdash;
They pass'd the dragon, horrible and bold.
They reach'd the strand, but now the em'rald lake,
Asphaltos seem'd, bituminous and black;
And waves on waves, with loud and hideous roar,
Flying the storm, were wreck'd upon the shore.
Th' undaunted Knight approach'd the pitchy flood,
And the huge waves subsided where he stood.
Again the shell upon the lake be cast;
Again a pinnace rose, with gilded mast
And silken sails.  "Forbear!" the Virgin cried,
"Forbear, dear Knight, to tempt the dang'rous tide:
Yon sounding cataract full before us view,
Tumbling abrupt 'mid fatal rocks below!
See where below yon whirlpool parts the deep,
With hideous roar and desolating sweep;
To bar our way, see many a ghastly form
Stride on the clouds and sail upon the storm!
O, fly my love!  for see!  new monsters rise
From the black flood, and roll their frightful eyes.
But lo!  behind us, radiant groves appear,
No Demons howl, no tempest rages there.
The smiling way invites our wand'ring feet,
And hark!  our ears celestial warblings greet:
Then come away; and with the snowy doves.
In woodbine bow'rs, and paradisian groves,
We'll live and die, forgotten and unknown,
From fairies safe, and hideous Oberon."

The Virgin ceas'd, and mute with horror stood,
Her eyes directed o'er the sable flood;
And lo!  she saw new forms of horror rise
From the black deep, and roll their Gorgon eyes.
The fatal shark, fierce plunging for his prey,
With his dread sport deform'd the wat'ry way;
The crocodile, with jaws expanded wide,
Stretch'd forth his scaly vastness on the tide.
Leviathan, unwieldy, huge, and bold,
From his broad sides the tumbling billows roll'd.
And horrid Hydras, (fearful sight!) appear'd,
And o'er the waves their fifty heads uprear'd.
All horrid shapes by fertile fancy bred,
Appear'd around them &mdash; shapes from earth that fled,
And made that land of fancy their abode,
When th' Eastern Star announc'd the new-born God.
The Gorgons hideous, with their snaky hair;
The Furies three, with whips and chains were there,
Whose hissing locks with horror fill'd the air.
The Harpies fierce, with claws terrific arm'd,
The Griffon, Sphinx, and Centaur, double-form'd;
And Pythons, bold as that Apollo slew,
And huge Chimeras, horrible to view;
And thousands more, which once on earth were known,
But now exist in Fairy Land alone.
There all the spirits of the storm they spied&mdash;
Dark Eolus, in grim, monarchal pride;
And blust'ring Boreas, crown'd with arctic snows,
Chill'd by whose breath the crack'ling waters froze,
And tumbling waves became as steadfast rocks&mdash;
There sullen Auster shook his rainy locks,
And all th' inferior regents of the wind,
Tumultuous rag'd, and roar'd, with fury blind.
Nor ceas'd the thunder, bellowing long and loud,
To launch his flaming javelins from his cloud
Of solid darkness! &mdash; Giant Horror strode
From wave to wave.  On iron chariot, rode
Collossal Danger, drawn athwart the gloom,
By flying Dragons, breathing fiery fume!
Upon the Knight the threat'ning Phantoms bent
Their angry eyes, with ruinous intent
To bar his passage o'er the stormy way,
But strove in vain Rinaldo to dismay.
Steadfast he stood begirt with armour bright,
In pride of strength and confidence of might,
And view'd the horrors with a wild delight&mdash;
So the bold eagle when he soars on high,
Prefers a stormy to a tranquil sky.

Trembling and faint and lily-pale with fear,
The virgin view'd the threat'ning phantoms near;
And as the ivy, when the tempests roar,
Clings to the oak for safety &mdash; so secure,
So feeble, so dependent and so fair,
With clasping arms and loose dishevell'd hair,
Sweet Crystalina on Rinaldo hung,
Whisp'ring her fears, with trembling, falt'ring tongue.
Fondly recumbent o'er the trembling maid,
The hero stood, and, with stout arm, upstay'd
Her sinking beauties; and with voice more smooth,
More soft than whisp'ring seraphs, when they sooth
The dying christian, thus the warrior said,
And calm'd the terrors of the lovely maid&mdash;
"Fear not, my love!  the harmless horrors round;
These may affright, but cannot virtue wound.
E'en had the Demons pow'r thy life to harm,
Still thou art safe, protected by this arm:
Or, if subdu'd, your Knight no longer stands
'Twixt you and danger; still unnumber'd hands
And wings angelic compass you around,
And that blest cross, can earth and hell confound.
But see!  our bark impatient seems to wait&mdash;
Step quickly in, o'er yet it be too late,
Step quickly in, and boldly trust to fate&mdash;
Though in our path unnumber'd perils stand,
That path conducts us to our native land;
E'en now, methinks, I see our happy Isle,
Beyond these intervening horrors smile!
Methinks I see thy aged parents mourn,
And on the sea-beach wait my ship's return.
He ceas'd &mdash; for now th' affrighted, feeble fair,
Swoon'd in his arms with terror and despair.
With strong embrace he bore the pallid maid,
Upon the deck with burnish'd gold o'erlaid,
And, to the winds, the snowy sails display'd.
Now o'er the lake the Fairy vessel flies,
On either hand though mountain billows rise,
Tho' tempest-torn, each low-hung sable cloud
Shoots blasting fires and hurls its thunders loud;
Tho' grimly monsters ride the rolling deep,
And threat'ning fiends the air, tempestuous, sweep.
Still in their sails Favonian breezes play,
And smooth before them shines the wat'ry way.
High on the prow a stately cherub stood,
And smiling calm o'erlook'd the stormy flood.
Bright glow'd his pinions as the clouds of morn,
Cerulean robes his graceful limbs adorn;
His waist was girded by a rainbow zone,
And in his hand a radiant faulchion shone.

Scarce had Rinaldo, (with no remedy
But tender kisses and embraces free,)
Restor'd the virgin, when they reach'd the shore,
The Phantoms fled, the tempest ceas'd to roar.
Once more the bark became a glitt'ring shell&mdash;
Once more the Knight secur'd the mystic spell;
Again the lake its gay-green face display'd,
And, thro' the vale, refreshing breezes play'd;
Warbled the birds, in every gilded grove,
Their tender tales of merriment and love,
While countless gems th' incumbent roof emblaz'd,
And light and beauty glow'd, where'er they gaz'd
Homeward, with joy, advanc'd the happy pair&mdash;
The gallant Knight sustains the feeble Fair
With his stout arm; and to the inquiring maid,
As thro' a sea of waving flow'rs they wade,
Talks of her good and venerable sire,
And mother dear &mdash; for much did she inquire
About their fate!  and, not unfrequent, paus'd
To weep the sorrows that herself had caus'd.
But with what eager, with what sad delight,
She heard the fortune of her faithful Knight!
O!  now she wept his woes and toils to hear,
Now half rejoic'd that all was borne for her;
Blush'd at the rising tumults of her breast,
Then hid the blush, those tumults that confess'd&mdash;
The gloom of sorrow and the light of bliss,
And tears and smiles usurp'd at once her face:
Such mingled hues the orient skies display,
When shadowy night half yields to rising day,
And shade and sunshine, intermingling, play.
Th' observant hero mark'd with happy eye,
Each throb, each blush, and each lose-prompted sigh;
And deem'd the toils and peril, he had past,
A trifling penance, for a prize so vast
Of present bliss. &mdash; Thus they, with converse sweet,
Charm'd toil and time, and with unwearied feet,
Soon reach'd the boundary of the valley fair,
And lo!  bright stairs of pearl ascended there&mdash;
Up to a cave magnificently bright,
They rose, with ivory balustrade, snow-white.
The same that cave, but how unlike the same,
By which the Knight to Oberon's palace came!
The gloomy gate, the giant guard was gone,
And in their place a golden portal shone.
And now, self-open'd, (with symphonious sound,
Whose soft vibrations thrill'd the regions round,)
That gate admits them, and before their eyes,
The cavern huge, a glowing labyrinth lies;
Whose concave roof, (a sparkling firmament,
A galaxy of gems,) a rainbow radiance lent.
Quickly this splendid labyrinth they pass'd,
And reach'd the spacious fairy land at last;
They pass'd the lake, where late Rinaldo stood,
And, in its waves, the bathing damsels view'd.
On rainbow bridge, they pass'd the palace fair,
Now, in primeval grandeur, tow'ring in the air:
And soon th' impatient, happy lovers stand,
Beside the entrance down to fairy land
Dark was the passage that to light upled,
With gloomy marble pav'd and overspread.
But ere he went, Rinaldo from the ground,
Some flow'rets pluck'd, 'mid thousands blooming round,
Compar'd with which, the fairest, sweetest flow'rs,
That deck the lawns or scent imperial bow'rs,
Are beautyless. &mdash; "These" (cried the lover blest)
"Shall grace my lovely Crystalina's breast."
Next from the earth, that beam'd with sparkling ore,
A crystal rock of diamond he tore,
And fondly said &mdash; "this bright and precious gem,
Shall grace the virgin's regal diadem."
Thus having said, the virgin's hand he took,
And, hastily, the Fairy world forsook.
Through rayless night, with doubtful steps and slow,
From steep to steep the silent lovers go&mdash;
And soon they spy &mdash; O, blest and cheering sight!
Far thro' the gloom, a stream of silver light.
How pleas'd benighted travellers behold
The morn ascend, in robes of yellow gold!
How pleas'd the storm-toss'd mariner, at last,
Views his lov'd country from the swinging mast!
How pleas'd the captive, dungeon'd long in night,
His chains knock'd off, emerges into light!
But ah!  more pleas'd, the happy pair survey
This heavenly light &mdash; this harbinger of day.
Soon from the cave the lovers issued forth,
And stood, transported, on their native earth.
Abroad they gaz'd, and saw with happy eye,
The earth wide spreading, and the ample sky;
The spacious vale, embrown'd with tow'ring woods,
And mountains, bathing in circumfluous clouds.
And now Aurora, from the climes of light,
Ascending fair, shower'd gold and rubies bright.
On sea and earth, and on Hyperion's road,
At his forth-coming, blushing roses strew'd.

Devotion, joy, and love, their bosoms sway'd,
They kneel'd, they pray'd &mdash; to God th' Eternal pray'd;
Glory and thanks and praise to him they gave,
Whose eye had guarded, and whose arm could save.
Then up they rose, and saw, with glad surprise,
Uncertain visions swim before their eyes;
Seraphic voices, and harmonic strings,
Ethereal forms and wave of golden wings,
Half seen, half heard, along th' enchanted air,
With pleasing wonder fill'd th' attentive pair.
Whate'er he saw, and heard, Rinaldo deem'd
Illusions false, by Fairy phantoms fram'd.
Wary he stood, for well the hero knew,
Danger most dang'rous, under goodly show.
His shield he cast o'er Crystalina's head,
Then high in air the guardian cross display'd&mdash;
Low-hov'ring angels clos'd their wings around,
Kiss'd the rais'd cross, and bow'd with awe profound.
The Knight beheld, and prone in worship bow'd,
When lo!  upon them fell a pearly cloud,
And o'er them, angels sang sublime and clear&mdash;
"Blest be the virtuous!  blest the brave and fair!"

With awful joy the list'ning lovers heard
The voice angelic, and their souls were cheer'd.
And now, towards the cave of Altagrand,
They turn'd their steps, slow-moving, hand in hand.
They reach'd his cave, and forth with tott'ring haste,
With staff in hand, the joyful Hermit pac'd,
To meet the pair the pair to meet him ran,
And thank'd, and blest, and kiss'd the hoary man&mdash;
The old man wept and call'd them children dear,
And welcom'd them with hospitable cheer.

At length Rinaldo press'd the Hermit's hand,
And said "I go to seek my native land,
Where parents dear our tedious stay bemoan.
And call us to their abdicated throne.
But how shall I forsake thee, aged Seer?
How leave my friend, my benefactor, here?
O come, beloved Father!  come with me,
Desert these wilds and cross the billowy sea;
Be still my guide, my counsellor, and friend,
Teach me to govern, and my throne defend
Then shalt thou live, from toil and peril free,
Companion high of sceptred majesty!"
"Deny him not," the gentle virgin cried&mdash;
"No longer here, O reverend Sire abide,
Where fiends inhabit, and where beasts of blood
Dispute with thee the lordship of the wood.
Where not a friend thy tedious days can cheer,
Prompt the glad smile, or dry the mournful tear,
Where age, where sickness, finds no hand to aid,
Cool the parch'd lip, or hold the aching head;
Where none can e'en thy dying wants supply,
Or, being dead, can close thy rayless eye.
Then go with us, and we, paternal sage!
Will cheer thy days, and tend thy drooping age;
Though baleful clouds have gloom'd thy wint'ry day,
Thy evening sun shall beam a cheering ray.
In regal chambers soon shalt thou be plac'd,
By slaves attended, with high honours grac'd;
And if it still delights thee to inspire
The chords symphonious of thy mystic lyre,
Thy minstrel hand shall strike the tuneful strings,
Mid listening nobles, and admiring kings.
To thee the shouting multitude shall bend,
With homage due, and bless Rinaldo's friend."
The Virgin ceas'd, but still her azure eye
Mutely implor'd a favourable reply.
The Seer replied &mdash; "I go, I go, my child&mdash;
Not that I dread the horrors of this wild;
Or need weak man's auxiliary arm,
To clothe my limbs and shield my life from harm;
Or have not slaves obsequious, to supply
My dying wants and close my sightless eye.
The Lord is all things, and is every where,
And all things claim his never-ceasing care.
He who on Israel, when, with famine spent,
The dainty quails, and foodful manna sent;
Who bade the ravens, in the desert, feed
The good Elijah:  Who at Israel's need,
Bade gushing fountains from the rock proceed;
He who, for Sampson, when the fight was done,
Drew crystal waters from the sapless bone;
Ev'n he, the mighty builder of the skies,
Dwells here unseen, and all my wants supplies.
For Love alone, with you I'll cross the main,
Reckless of pow'r, of pleasure, and of pain.
But tell me Lady, how, ah!  how shall we
Traverse the long rough journey to the sea?
Full many a mile, o'er mountain, dale, and plain,
Our feeble feet must bear us to the main:
Rinaldo's steed, that pastur'd unconfin'd,
On this wild mountain, we no more shall find;
As thou by nature, I am weak with age."
The Knight exclaim'd &mdash; "Ah!  fear not, hoary Sage,
My feet shall soon explore yon peopled vale;
There many a mead perfumes the passing gale;
There cattle low, and fleet-foot coursers neigh&mdash;
For these the spoils of Fairy Land shall pay."
He spake, and then, with disappointed groan,
Produc'd the fairy flow'rs and diamond stone:
The flow'rs were faded, and the diamond bright
Crumbled to dust, and vanish'd from his sight.
The Seer beheld, and thus the pair address'd&mdash;
"Such are the treasures of the land unblest;
While there detain'd, deluded man surveys
That glitt'ring world with wonder and with praise:
But rais'd to earth, a sphere more high and just,
Its joys are folly, and its treasures dust.
When higher still, ascends the enfranchis'd soul.
Where purer orbs in Empyrean roll,
Ev'n earthly joys shall vain and idle seem,
Our wealth and splendour but an empty dream."

Thus having said, the hospitable Seer,
Into his cavern led the weary pair.
But scarce they enter'd his mysterious cell,
When lo!  upsprang by necromantic spell,
A banquet rare! &mdash; the cave more spacious grows,
And cheering tapers flash in sparkling rows.
They sit, they eat; while, rang'd on ev'ry side,
Stand slaves, obedient, clad in silken pride.
And viewless minstrels, all above, around,
From fretted lyres, solicit tuneful sound,
In consonance with mellow-breathing flutes,
Trumps, silver-tongu'd, and softly-sounding lutes
Nor wanted they harmonious voices there,
To chant seraphic paeans to the pair,
That might alone suspend fierce hunger's rage;
Allay Ixion's torments, and assuage,
The lassitude of toil-worn Sissiphus,
Or charm the thirst of fever'd Tantalus.
With lays alternate rival spirits sung
The warrior bold; the virgin fair and young:

FIRST SPIRIT.
No more; of young Leander, sing no more,
Who oft the roaring Hellespont swam o'er,
His lovely priestess, Hero, to embrace;
No more, ye bards!  of fabled Orpheus tell,
Who sought his lov'd Eurydice in hell,
And, with his lyre, controll'd the Stygian race.

What music could not, bravery has done&mdash;
To Fairy Land Rinaldo went and won
A fairer Fair, in spite of hostile arms;
Titania's love, a proffer'd throne he spurn'd,
And, spite of hosts, with Crystaline return'd
Triumphant, and shall soon enjoy her charms.

SECOND SPIRIT.
Hail Crystalina! &mdash; henceforth ever be
Th' example high of truth and chastity,
Which force nor spells, nor richest bribes could stain;
In vain, to tempt thee, Oberon display'd
His golden lures &mdash; commended, menac'd, pray'd,
Transform'd thy shape, and prison'd thee in vain.

Sing, O ye Bards!  the chaste Lucretia's name,
Who, death preferring ev'n to guiltless shame,
Did suffer martyrdom for chastity:
Laud her aloud, but louder still declare,
She ne'er with Crystalina can compare,
For beauty, virtue, love, and constancy.

Of Hero sing &mdash; the fair, the faithful maid,
Who, on the tow'r her midnight lamp display'd,
To light Leander o'er the stormy sea;
Who, when her lover sank beneath the wave,
Sprang from the tow'r into a wat'ry grave&mdash;
Example sad of love and constancy.

Th' Athenian Virgins &mdash; fair, unfortunate,
Unfortunately fair &mdash; O sing their fate!
When Hydra-headed Tyranny arose,
And doom'd to shame their chastity; dismay'd,
They of the grave a sanctuary made&mdash;
O sing their virtues and lament their woes.
Sing them aloud, but louder still declare,
None can with lovely Crystaline compare.

BOTH SPIRITS.
Hail!  matchless hero!  hail, unrivall'd fair!
Who can with him, or who with her compare,
For beauty, valour, chastity, and love?
None but the Knight deserves the Virgin's charms,
None but the maid is worthy of his arms&mdash;
Hail favour'd pair, whom heaven and earth approve!

Thus sang, to sound of instrumental wires,
Aerial minstrels, fanning th' am'rous fires
Of either heart; and now, refresh'd and gay,
The lovers rose, impatient of delay&mdash;
"Depart we now!" the anxious hero cried,
"Our journey's long, the ocean wave is wide.
Westward from hence, within a circling bay,
Anchor'd in safety from the stormy sway
Of Eolus, my ship and seamen stay.
Our course we cannot lose; the unerring sun
Shall be our pilot thither, and forerun
Our tardy steps, and on some mountain height,
Each eve, suspend his beacon, broad and bright."

