Thus spoke the Oak, elate and proud,
And clos'd  his Speech with Laughter loud.
For so the Way he ever led,
To gain Applause for what he said.
The slavish Herd &mdash; (their Honour sold,)
Approve &mdash; obsequious to his G&mdash;
The fertile Dunghill scorn'd his Pride,
And taking Courage, thus replied:
Art thou such Brass &mdash; so lost to Shame,
Must thou thy self, thy Worth proclaim?
Where is thy Mercenary Band?
To skreen thy Madness, still at Hand.
Where those Idolaters of State?
Do Rats thy Fall prognosticate?
Rebel thy 'gainst thy golden Rod?
Nor truckle to th' imperious Nod.
Or are thy B&mdash; more sparing thrown,
P&mdash;s retrench'd, &mdash; half honest grown.
More decent from their Mouths, thy Praise,
Less Indignation would it raise.
But thou, ungrateful to thy Soil,
Rais'd to thy Grandeur by my Toil.
Thy antient Friends are laid aside,
Because they humour not thy Pride.
Forgetful whence thy Boughs arise,
Aspiring Boughs which threat the Skies.
The verdant Honours of thy Head,
Spring from this low neglected Bed.
To me the loftier Cedar owes,
To me, the spreading Beach its Boughs;
Nourish'd by me, the Orange grows,
And Flowers and Herbs their Sweets disclose.
Oft have I warn'd thee of this Fate,
Now dread, now feel, &mdash; repent too late.

Harry the Farmer, jovial Lad,
By Taxes crush'd, &mdash; the Times were bad:
A generous Neighbour frank and gay;
But now his Farm in Ruin lay.
To him the Dunghill told its Grief,
Told the Oak's Pride, and sought Relief.
Give to thy Friend thy helping Hand;
Unite my Manure to thy Land.
So shall the Oak his Loss deplore,
And treble Crop increase thy Store.

The Farmer to his Reasons yields,
And the rich Compost crown'd his Fields.
Soon found the Oak, the Manure fled,
And droop'd his Boughs, and hung his Head.
His Top is spread with sickly White,
And bloated Gnarres offend the Sight.
A monstrous Nusance now 'tis held,
The Landlord bids it should be fell'd.
Rotten the Boughs, the Trunk is large,
And Planks, the Felling will discharge.

On human Minds, what Errors spread!
How by Appearances misled!
To Shew and Outside we submit,
Laughter is Humor, Noise is Wit:
So the Youth snared with Cloe's Charms,
Diseas'd and feeble, quits her Arms;
So Wrong-Head caught by &mdash; Spell's,
For Titles, Toys, his Honour sells.

The haughty Oak soon prostrate fell,
And Shouts of Joy his Downfal tell:
His Trunk disclos'd an Odious Sight,
Rotten and hollow in the Light;
Or fill'd with Spiders, Pismires, Flies,
Vermine of every Shape and Size:
Unfit to mend a Gate or Spade,
Even for Fuel too decay'd;
But still wou'd crackle in the Fire,
And in a smoldring Smoke expire;
A Caput mortuum, useless priz'd,
Worthless to mix with Dung despis'd.
