I. 1.
'Twas on a lonely cliff, whose height
O'erlooks the hostile Gallic Shore,
The Muse reclin'd, from Mortal sight
To hide her grief, her wrongs deplore.
Her downcast eye, her faultering tongue,
Her lute neglected, and her lyre unstrung,
Mark'd the deep anguish of her mind,
While thus, with sighs, she mourn'd the miseries of mankind.

I. 2.
"Ah!  whither are Life's sweetest charms,
Taste, Truth, and Genius, whither fled?
Where, 'midst the horrid din of arms,
Shall Science rear her drooping head?
Lo, Anarchy pours forth her bands
O'er trembling Europe's desolated lands!
Insatiate Slaughter sweeps the plains,
While Rapine shouts applause, and dire Oppression reigns!

I. 3.
"Shall my degenerate Sons their triumph hail?
Soothe the barbarian Spoiler's pride?
Or, borne on Fortune's swelling tide,
With votive incense woo her fav'ring gale?
No rather let the Aonian Choir
To drear Oblivion's shade retire,
There tune, unheard, the pensive lay,
Than lost to honour, dead to shame,
Exalt each base Usurper's name,
Or bow to prosperous Vice, and own her lawless sway."

II. 1.
She ceas'd; when, through the gloom of night,
A voice, the sorrowing Goddess chear'd,
And, circled with a blaze of light,
BRITANNIA'S aweful form appear'd,
"Arise!" she cried:  "thy gentle train,
By Truth inspir'd, shall breathe a nobler strain:
Her voice shall bid their Patriot lays
Record their Country's fame, and consecrate her praise.

II. 2.
"Mark, whereso'er my banner waves,
Where'er my thunders rend the sky,
What Nations bless the Power that saves,
That saves benign in Victory!
Ye Seas that lave the Gallic Coast!
Ye Shores that saw Batavia's vanquish'd Host!
Ye Ports that hide the shame of Spain,
Own, though reluctant, own my triumphs on the Main!

II. 3.
"But, oh!  what glories grac'd my favour'd Isle,
When Fame to her exulting shore,
High pois'd on eagle pinions, bore
The deeds that struck with dread th' astonish'd Nile?
When, fir'd by Hope, my gallant band,
'Midst Egypt's rocks and faithless strand,
Each danger hail'd with proud acclaim;
When, fix'd to conquer or expire,
Through hostile straits, through raging fire,
My generous Hero press'd, and rais'd a deathless name.

III. 1.
"Yet, Muse, awhile forego the sight
Of ruthless War, ensanguin'd strife:
Behold, with calm and pure delight,
The social Charities of life?
See my lov'd Sons transported join
In deeds that lift the mortal to divine!
See heavenly sympathy appear,
Redress the Orphan's wrong, and dry the Widow's tear!

III. 2.
"What bitter anguish, heartfelt pains,
Oft pierce his bright distinguish'd mind,
Whose genius wak'd thy heaven-born strains,
Whose liberal taste inform'd mankind!
That mind, which Hope, with transient smile,
Lur'd to betray, and flatter'd to beguile,
Oppress'd by Want, o'ewhelm'd by Care,
Finds Death its surest friend, its only guest, Despair.

III. 3.
"Oh, then, while generous transports thrill the soul,
Let sweet Benevolence inspire
The festive song, attune the lyre,
And brightly sparkle in the flowing bowl!
Let Harmony with Mirth unite,
While Learning's vot'ries feel delight
In pleasures temperately gay!
All hearts in Pity's secret cause,
Shall greet their lays with fond applause,
And each revolving year renew this festal day."
