Dear Muse!  I beg, &mdash; (and don't my suit deny,)
The want of better company, supply.
With sweet suggestions, tolerable make,
The joyless journies, I'm oblig'd to take:
Point out some soothing theme, such hints impart,
As may both chear the mind, and mend the heart.
Suppose, we then, with pleasing retrospect,
On each past, grateful scene of life, reflect.
Be this, my Clio! &mdash; as I jogg along;
Be this th' amusing subject of my song.

Childhood! &mdash; thou charming state of innocence!
Distracting care, and criminal offence,
To thee, are quite unknown:  successive joys
Affect us, then, with wonder and surprise;
Each day, each hour some novelty affords,
That makes us pleas'd beyond the power of words.
When early snowdrops, in the yard, appear,
And daffodils adorn the infant-year;
When pretty, warbling birds prepare to sing,
And gladly welcome the return of spring,
How, quite transported seems the chuckling boy,
Who, first, a fragrant primrose can espy!
The flow'ry wonders of the verdant mead,
Farther from home, the little ramblers lead.
Hair bells and meadow boots engage the sight,
And lovely lady-smocks give new delight.
Such various beauties on the plain abound,
Ev'n paradise itself appears all round.
The fancy feels such images imprest,
As make each merry little youngster blest.

Grown riper, we submit to wholsome rules,
And the grave discipline of noted schools.
There, books and play, alternately, relieve;
Knowledge impart, and health and vigour give.
Leap-frog, ball, prison bass, by day delight;
Hand-back diverts, or hide-and-seek,  at night.
Fondly we soon begin to read romance,
To write, to cast account, to draw, to dance.
The charms of musick, and melodious rhimes,
Enchant us too:  and oft, at vacant times,
Verses, in rude essay, we try to make,
And a still rougher fiddlestick, to shake.
But smoother measures, and a clearer note,
Our rising praises, by degrees, promote.
Nature still prompts our parents to be kind,
And those, that love, to candour are inclin'd;
No small improvement, daily can discern:
And all (you know) must have a time to learn.
Now, now behold! &mdash; each hopeful, studious boy,
His book begins, with diligence to ply;
Of learning now begins to have some taste,
Nor cares, at play, his precious time to waste.
Latin and Greek, to him, are glorious gains;
And virtue well rewards his utmost pains.

But O! &mdash; to college, when at last we're brought,
And take of Helicon a deeper draught,
How do all kinds of mystic science, there,
To our transported eyes, unveil'd appear!
How, academick lectures, there, unfold
Wisdom, superior far to gems, or gold!
Philosophy, and Classicks, there, display
Their diff'rent charms, and pave a pleasing way
To solid learning, and to lib'ral arts;
The purest blessings, to a lad of parts.
At these great joys, this heav'n of happiness,
Ev'n I (tho' fitly not describe) can guess;
I, that obtain a mod'rate share, at most,
And, but a slender stock of nature's gifts, can boast.

If after study, with some chosen friend,
The weary'd mind you're willing to unbend;
Whether we stray along the open streets,
Or publick walks, or more retir'd retreats,
Some curious garden, some enchanting grove,
Or thro' the verdant mead, delight to rove,&mdash;
Whatever scene of pleasure we select,
Whatever way, our wand'ring feet direct,
Those pleasing pains we cannot, sure, repent,
That vig'rous health advance, and sweet content.

On horse-back, if dispos'd to take the air,
To some sweet, neighb'ring hamlet we repair,
Or love to bathe, where limpid streams do flow;
Or, whether we, for pastime, or for food,
With angling catch the silent, scaly brood:
What roads, what towns, what villages invite!
What rivers give, each diff'rent way, delight!
Fair Woodstock here, O!  let my fancy view,
Newnham, and Abington, and Islip too;
The charming Charwell, here too let me name,
The gentle Isis, and the winding Thame.

Or, if melodious strains our fancy suit,
The sprightly fiddle, or soft breathing flute,
Or sweet spinet, or nobler harpsichord,
To flagging students rare relief afford.
His hand, each artist willing to compleat,
At frequent concerts gladly goes to meet
Some choice harmonious brethren of the string,
Where, now, fine fav'rite airs they jointly sing,
Now, in all parts, new compositions play,
And social converse crowns the joyful day.

But, who can meetly celebrate in rhime,
The musical triumv'rate of that time?&mdash;
That dear, dear time! &mdash; when I on arts intent,
My happy, halcyon-days in Oxford spent.
Thy songs, O Powell, what could e'er surpass,
When sweetly join'd with symphony, and bass?
Thee, wondrous Waring!  still, methinks, I hear;
Judicious Goodson still enchants my ear.
Your soft vibrations, and melodious trills,
Ev'n to this day, my lively fancy feels.
The Graces thus, 'tis said, link'd arm in arm,
United heretofore their triple charm;
And, with surprising symmetry of parts,
Were wont to move, and captivate all hearts.

Colours, &mdash; when fine performances appear,&mdash;
No less can charm the eye, than sounds the ear.
Good hands, in both capacities we prize,
Unless we're destitute of ears and eyes,
When, thro' the picture-gallery, we pass,
And there admiring view each diff'rent face,
Vandyke and Lely there, with Kneller lay
Such spells, we've hardly pow'r to get away.
Painters new life to benefactors give:
Great Ormond there, and Laud for ever live.
Of founders too the never-dying fame,
Immortalizing pencils there proclaim.
Men of great learning, piety, and parts,
And peerless masters of prodigious arts,
Here shew their awful forms:  These, these are they,
To whom, profound respect, posterity shall pay.

But O!  when Ma'd'len's alter-piece we view,
And at the same time, hear an anthem too,
Musick and painting, there, their charms unite,
And give the mid ineffable delight.
How, when we hear the organ's solemn sound,
Does our rais'd heart from earth to heav'en rebound!
When we behold the dear, depicted wall,
How seem we then caught up with raptur'd Paul!
Th' archangel's mighty trump, how seem to hear,
And the great Judge of all the world revere!

Now, to the grand Sheldonian theatre,
Suppose, &mdash; at least, in fancy, &mdash; we repair.
The noble structure, how do all admire!
What lofty thoughts, the pointed roof inspire!
There first, the wond'rous work we view; &mdash; and then,
Gaze on the portrait of unrivall'd Wren.

To Ashmole's sweet musaeum, if they step,
What pleasures, there, do virtuoso's reap!
What curious things do there our eyes explore,
Where arts and nature lavish all their store!
There Whiteshide too, with philosophic skill,
Was wont, e'erwhile, the wond'ring mind to fill,
And richly feast observant, curious eyes,
With neat experiments, and sweet surprise.

Nor are we less agreeably amus'd,
With the mysterious art of printing us'd.
Pleas'd with the beauteous edifice, we gaze;
And well the work there done deserves our praise.
The curious types a strong impression leave,
Types, the expert compilers interweave.
Here, in the Muse's mint the printer coins
The precious oar of orthodox divines;
And, by his skill, diffusively imparts
The choicest stores of lit'rature and arts.
For, sure, the learned World must needs confess
The noble products of the Oxford-press.
Nor stands far hence the venerable dome,
Where theologick disputants do come.
Great Potter then did worthily preside;
The knottiest points his eloquence unty'd:
Potter! &mdash; of Oxon once, of Lambeth now the pride.

Or if in Indian-ink we take delight,
And love to draw, sometimes, in black and white,
With curious cuts the picture-shops are stor'd,
Which, by the connoisseurs, are oft explor'd.
There, we designs, sweet, nat'ral, graceful, bold,
From Raphael, Rubens, and Le Brun, behold.
There, Mezzotints, numerous and neat,
Admiring eyes, in grateful manner, greet.

Sometimes, with eager pace, and cheerful air,
We to some noted Bookseller's repair,
The various pamphlets on the counter view,
And still are entertain'd with something new.
But, if we talk of books, how can we chuse
To mention, O my kind, reminding Muse,
Those lovely libraries, with care and cost
Selected, which the colleges can boast?
Especially, the grand Bodleian pile,
That noblest treasure of our British isle.
Which way soe'er the learned vista's chang'd,
Books upon books, in infinitum, rang'd,
Richly regale the most insatiate eye,
And, with the Vatican itself may vye.
There, numerous arts and science abound;
And there, the rarest manuscripts abound;
From whence that prying antiquarian, Hearne,
What had been done in time of yore, cou'd learn.
But ah!  too hard a task is undertook:
Barely to speak of all, wou'd swell into a book.

Happy Oxonians! &mdash; O!  too blest ye were,
Did ye but duly know the joys, ye share.
Some pangs at parting well may be suppos'd,
When these unparallel'd delights are lost:
And no small grief is sure to be sustain'd,
When, from our dearest alma mater wean'd:
This noble nurs'ry we at length must leave,
And, with the saddest sighs our bosoms heave.
Seven years, it's true, are quickly come and gone;
But, ah!  at Oxford, seem no more than one:
The rolling world, there, whirls about so fast,
The pleasing 'prenticeship, at once, is past.
And, &mdash; O!  the thing I well remember yet;
Nay more, methinks, I never shall forget,
How, o'er each shoulder, with repeated look,
By turns, I many a longing farewell took.
Farewel, sweet place!  said I with heavy heart;
Adieu!  dear Oxford! &mdash; thou and I must part.

How has my soul been ravish'd with delight,
In dear, delusive visions of the night!
How oft been fill'd with wonder and surprise,
And sweetly dream'd of academick joys!
But morning sighs the error soon confess'd,
And I no more the paradise possess'd.

Nor cou'd I well with such a loss dispense,
Had not wit, beauty, virtue, and good sense,
In my dear, amiable Maria met,
And render'd her, in ev'ry thing, compleat.
The musick of her voice, and in her soul,
And fine, fair features harmoniz'd the whole.
Her love of books, her charming hand and stile,
Her cheerful suff'rance of domestick toil;
Her gen'rous extract, and uncommon fame,
Made me e'en doat upon the very name.
The strange vicissitude of hopes and fears,
Of rallying friends the not unwelcome jeers,
(For friends will joke upon a lover's pains,)
Caus'd me to hug the more my am'rous chains:
And each sweet interview (surpassing ease!)
Endear'd, for ever since, each pleasing place.

Chatcull! &mdash; O charming Chatcull! &mdash; ev'ry part
Of thee will ever, sure, rejoice my heart.
O!  thither let my roving mind remove,
And view the various scenes of virtuous love.
The decent house, wherein my fair one dwelt,
Reminds me of the fervid flames, I felt.
The handsome parlour, where I prov'd so pos'd;
When, much abash'd, my passion I disclos'd;
The spacious lightsome room, wherein I lay,
When thus my true respects I came to pay,
And ev'ry picture seems, methinks, to strive
These fav'rite, dear ideas to revive.
Be this too mention'd; &mdash; that whene'er I see,
Or mount, by steps, the arbour in the tree,
How does the lofty ever-verdant yew
The thoughts of pleasing incidents, renew!
For here, one charming day, my lovely fair,
And I &mdash; (O sweet remembrance!) took the air.
There, as she sat, a damask-rose I took,
There, with a trembling hand, and tender look,
The flow'r, depriv'd of thorns, I gently press'd,
And blushing put between each snowy breast.
Then &mdash; (in the words of dear, ingenious Gay,
Who always speaks in a becoming way,)
"Go, rose, said I, my Chloe's bosom grace;
O!  might I but supply that envy'd place,
With undissembled, never-fading love,
Happy &mdash; O!  then, how happy should I prove!"

In short, &mdash; the gardens, groves, extensive green,
And whate'er else may thereabout be seen,
All point out, where (inchanting time of life!)
I woo'd the dearest maid to be my wife.
Charms too, by chance, whene'er my eyes behold,
Experience proves, I need not to be told,
The flutt'ring heart of man, how it affects,
To view the sweetest pattern of her sex.
For there, quite charm'd, and with a kind of awe,
There, there I first, this best of blessings, saw.
And, O delightful Broughton; &mdash; thee I'll love,
As long as life this beating heart shall move.
Whenever I ascend that sacred hill,
Whereon thy chapel stands, fresh joys I feel.
This I with pleasure found, the other day,
When thither I repair'd my thanks to pay.
For there, O!  there, the nuptial knot was ty'd,
Sweet M&mdash;y B&mdash;r there became my bride!

Wedlock! &mdash; thou holy, happy, blest estate!
What tongue describe, what language can relate,
In fitting numbers, all the various joys,
And purer pleasures, that in thee we prize?
Joys, which the brutal sot wou'd fain disown,
And seem, to lawless libertines, unknown.
But, O!  the heav'nly band shall have due praise
From all, whom reason, or religion sways.
I chiefly, as in strictest duty bound,
With grateful heart, these praises shou'd resound:
I! &mdash; that so long have liv'd with such a wife!
And meetly shou'd commend a marry'd life,
Did I, with strict regard to sacred vows,
But answer half the merit of my spouse.

'Tis true, no perfect happiness (we know,)
Can justly be expected here below.
Chequer'd with ills each state of life we find:
The world may frown; or friends may seem unkind.
But yet, in providence we ought to trust;
Murmurs are most ungrateful, and unjust.
This world's a state of discipline; a school,
Where we must learn our appetites to rule,
With care to use each innocent device,
To govern passions, and to conquer vice;
By faith, and hope of unseen things to live,
To love our foes, and injuries forgive.
Prudence, as well as probity, shou'd prove
Us wise as serpents, harmless as the dove;
And to look back upon a well spent life,
When death approaches, &mdash; be our only strife.
Then, the true riches, we shall have in store,
When this vain, fleeting world shall be no more.
The little while indeed, we sojourn here,
Some transient objects of delight appear.
But lo!  we, by eternal truth, are told,
The good shall greater things than these, behold.
No mortal eye has seen, nor ear has heard
The Things, that heav'n has for the just prepar'd.
Nor can the most capricious mind comprise
The meanest part of those extatick joys.
Rivers of pleasure, there for ever flow!
The saints, shall there, in full perfection, know
All, that can give delight, or merit praise,
Attract their love, or admiration raise.

Eternal source of all, that's truly good!
O!  may no more such bounty be withstood:
Such grace, no longer let my sins abuse;
But boundless favour holy thoughts infuse.
In this short scene of things, this vale of tears,
Whate'er falls out, let no desponding fears
My soul cast down, or over-much deject.
No; &mdash; I'll on future happiness reflect,
Fix my unstable thoughts on things above,
And the great God of endless mercy love,
With all my heart, and soul, and strength, and mind:
The only sure way, this! &mdash; true happiness to find.
