As over Falkirk's blood-stain'd field
Anglia, imperial goddess, flew,
With lifted spear, and radiant shield,
Conspicuous blazing to the view;
Her visage, lately clouded with despair,
Now reassum'd its first majestic air.

Such seen, as oft, in battle warm,
She glow'd thro' many a martial age;
Or mild to breathe the civil charm,
With pious plans, and counsel sage:
For o'er the mingling glories of her face,
A manly greatness heightened female grace.

Loud as the trumpet rolls its sound,
Her voice the powers celestial rais'd;
While her victorious sons around,
With silent joy and wonder gaz'd.
The sacred muses heard th' immortal lay,
And thus to earth the notes of fame convey.

'Tis done, my sons, 'tis nobly done!
How vain th' efforts of rebel pow'r?
How faint their short-liv'd glory shone,
Born and extinguish'd in an hour?
Proudly they meditated slavish reigns;
One glorious moment came, and burst their chains.

But late, forlorn, dejected, pale,
A prey to each insulting foe,
I sought the grove and gloomy vale,
To vent in solitude my woe:
Now, to my hand, the balance fair restor'd,
I wield again on high the imperial sword.

What arm has this deliverance wrought?
'Tis he, the gallant youth, appears;
O!  warm in fields, and cool in thought,
Beyond the slow advance of years.
Haste, let me, rescu'd now from future harms,
Strain fast the filial virtue in my arms.

I early nurs'd this royal youth,
The future guardian of these shores;
I fill'd his sacred breast with truth,
With fortitude, and wisdom's stores.
For when a noble action is decreed,
Heav'n forms the hero for the destin'd deed.

Nor could the soft seducing charms
Of luxury, sure bane of youth,
E'er quench his generous thirst of arms,
Of honour, fame, of virtue, truth;
Fill'd with the warmth a country's love imparts,
He fled all pleasures, and admir'd all arts.

He came, he spoke, and all around,
As quick as heav'n's swift darted flame,
Shepherds turn'd warriors at the sound,
And every bosom beat for fame:
They caught th' heroic ardour from his eyes,
And at his side the willing heroes rise.

Rouse, Scotland, rouse, fame's warlike son,
In all thy ancient splendor shine;
Compleat the noble work begun,
And half the glory shall be thine.
I lend a prince (for such is heaven's decree)
Whose arm o'ercomes for George and liberty.
