Beneath a hazle's unfrequented shade
The desolate Cloddilla sighing laid:
'Twas love that robb'd the silly maid of rest,
Love, the worst tyrant of a gentle breast!

Ah!  well-a-day, she cry'd, can Cuddy scorn
The girl to whom so oft he love has sworn?
Can he recal those melting am'rous vows,
Which he wou'd whisper while I milk'd the cows,
And all the tender things which he wou'd say,
While we alone 'i th' fields were making hay,
And now to his Coddilla be so shy?
Ah!  woe is me, with pining grief I'se die.

What is there I to Cuddy e'er refus'd?
How often Colin for his sake abus'd!
Colin!  who on his pipe so sweetly plays,
And did not Lucy, Colin too approve?
Why shou'd not Cuddy then Cloddilla love?
But Cuddy to Coddilla still is shy,
Ah!  woe is me, with pining grief I'se die.

Ah!  had I Hobbinol but haply lov'd,
I shou'd not now those piteous plaints have mov'd;
Nor Hobbinol have run beside his wits,
And raving, talk'd of love and scorn by fits.
But why do I accuse my silly will,
For fate, they say, predestines weddings still:
May Cuddy's lot and mine this verify,
Else, woe is me!  with pining grief I'se die.

What tho' I be not fair, but rather brown,
I've yet been prais'd by many a neighb'ring clown;
And tho' no flow'rs so white as lillies are,
Are none so beautiful, because less fair?
As I've been told, I've no uncomely mien,
And in my shape is due proportion seen;
I sing as sweet as any nightingale,
And none can trip more nimbly with a pail:
But Cuddy's blind to what all other spy.
Ah!  woe is me, with pining grief I'se die.

Blithe Marian now receives his flatt'ring vows,
Marian who milks, they say, three milk-white cows;
But grant that this is true, as well 'tmay be,
Can Marian for this compare to me?
Is this enough to make her Cuddy's bride?
For nothing must he e'er expect beside,
Except old Hodge and goody Tattle lie.
Ah!  woe is me, with pining grief I's die.

I've twenty sheep, ten lambkins, and a farm,
Besides a well-thatch'd house to keep us warm;
And feather-bed, as soft as any down;
All these, if Cuddy will, shall be his own:
But if all these my Cuddy cannot buy,
Ah!  woe is me, with pining grief I'se die.

Thus having said, she to her cot withdrew,
And wail'd, 'cause Cuddy was not there, a-new.
