Let other bards of more ambitious views,
Extend their thoughts, and grander subjects chuse.
For me, I meditate no lofty pitch,
Nor aim at quarry far above my reach.
My theme to ev'ry bard may well belong,
Yet is forgot, and still remains unsung.
Frogs, mice, and gnats, their battles and their praise
Have been recorded in immortal lays.
A splendid shilling in poetic lines
Improves it's worth, and with more lustre shines.
Hoops, buckets, pigmies, puppets, locks and fans,
Have been commended, by no vulgar pens.
But I no trivial arguments rehearse,
The grey goose-quill shall grace my humble verse.
Who do's not plain see the various aid
The quill imparts to men of ev'ry trade?
What art, what bus'ness can you take in hand,
That do's not her assistances demand?
From the high statesman, to the lowest clown,
All her peculiar benefits must own;
But scholars most of all (good scholars) will
For ever speak in raptures of the quill.
The swans of old, for some mistaken cause,
The poets always mention with applause.
Maeander's banks were honour'd with their songs
They shar'd that praise that now to geese belongs.
To geese the haughty swans wou'd give no place
For "inter anseres" was a disgrace.
But lest I partial seem to judge the fray,
Hear what the feather'd orators can say.
Thou screamer, says the swan, of gaggling race,
Amongst us swans how durst thou show thy face?
Our praises dwell on ev'ry poet's tongue,
Renown'd for beauty, and renown'd for song.
The greatest geniuses of Rome and Greece,
Extolling swans have meanly spoke of geese.
Ev'n to a proverb, in contempt's your name,
For goose and fool now signify the same.
Vain bird!  replies the goose, I scorn thy ways,
To be so fond of false and fulsome praise.
Beyond decorum you assert your right,
Is nothing beautiful, but what is white?
Do poets say you sing?  what's more absurd?
And yet you take the flatt'ring poets word.
Weak, silly minds by flatt'ry are betray'd,
Of wisdom then let not your boast be made.
But we, whom you despise, with just pretence
May claim the patronage of men of sense.
Do's not antiquity our worth extol?
Manlius, and we preserv'd Rome's capitol.
Our wings support old Homer's deathless name,
And aided Milton in his rise to fame.
Upon our pinions bold Historians soar,
And Nat'ralists abstrusest things explore.
Self-praise sometimes befits a modest tongue,
When calumny and spite have done us wrong.
My quills have toil'd to gain a merchant wealth,
And wrote a thousand recipes for health.
What parchment-skins have they not copy'd o'er
To make mens rights and properties secure?
In pious writings they no pains refuse,
But trace the paths to long celestial joys.
By them the virtuous lover does impart
The soft, engaging dictates of his heart.
By them the yielding nymph replies again,
And without blushing owns her faithful swain.
These favours, tho' she do's not dying sing,
The geese contributes from her useful wing.
Nor do's she beg the boon of flatt'ring verse,
Her real worth, and merit to rehearse.
From Chaucer's times to these our present days,
The grey goose-quill was ever held in praise.
And, if that verse eternity can give,
Its name and honours shall for ever live.
