Britons!  by no example aw'd,
Who follow still your fathers crimes,
Who shun the temples of your God,
And trace the vice of former times,
From piety your empire's glory came,
From that your state arose, on that depends your fame.

Britain has oft for impious guilt,
Felt the dread vengeance from on high;
Her sons in rage their blood have spilt,
And kindred made their kindred die;
Nor rage of civil arms alone they bore,
But the Batavian pow'r has thunder'd on the shore.

Th' Iberian, haughty in his turn,
Has with bold insults shewn his pride,
Receiv'd each threatened vow with scorn,
And all the British pow'r defy'd;
While vice o'er Britain's land triumphant reign'd,
And the most sacred bands of marriage are prophan'd.

From such a source must every woe,
Still growing greater, take its rise,
And on the realm and people flow,
Who still degen'rate into vice:
Virtue and truth alone are sought by few,
But crowds rush into vice, and courtly crimes pursue.

The forward girl, scarce fit for love,
Will in the dance each art display,
With thousand wanton airs will move,
In infancy obscenely gay;
Thus learns, long e'er she is to marriage led,
To raise adult'rous flames, and scorn the nuptial bed.

The purchas'd wife her spark invites,
Before her husband's eyes to toy,
Nor will she stay for stoln delights,
And privately her bliss enjoy;
But, with her cuckold's leave, she gives her charms
To him who bought them dear, and meets the captain's arms.

From race so vicious never came
Those Britons of Eliza's reign,
Who, zealous for their country's fame,
Humbled the haughty pride of Spain:
Nor those who made imperious Lewis yield,
And shook the Gallic throne at Blenheim's glorious field.

But manly youths of manly sires,
They strung their nerves with hardy toil,
Free from effeminate desires,
They fell'd the oak, or till'd the soil:
Nor ceas'd their labour till the sunny ray
Vary'd the mountain shade, and clos'd the well-spent day.

What will not length of time make worse?
Our sires less pious grew than theirs;
If we improve the vicious course,
And to new sins instruct our heirs,
Down, down the glory of our Britain goes,
And sets in vice, which first from thirst of virtues rose.
