Too long the fopperies of France,
O Britain, thy brave sons invade,
Shake off, at length, the shameful trance,
And leave the base inglorious shade.
How art thou fall'n, thou terror of thy foes!
Whose nod made tyrants just, and gave the world repose.

Rouse thee to action; let the beau
Change for the helm his smart toupee,
With storms and cold familiar grow,
And brave the hoarse tempestuous sea:
For balls and operas, let him learn to bear
The gripes of want, and rough fatigues of war.

Instead of snuff-box, take the spear;
And for a tender virgin's heart,
A nobler conquest let him share,
And bravely storm a Spanish fort:
Thro' slaughter'd heaps his bloody passage force,
And where the battle kindles urge his dangerous course.

No more the ladies shall admire
The fop, who now enjoys their smiles;
But praise the hero's martial fire,
And with their love reward his toils;
Bless that brave man, to whom the Spaniards yield,
Triumphant, in the chamber, and the fields.

What coward would not die with joy,
Whene'er his country claims his breath?
The trembling maid, the beardless boy,
Are snatch'd by unrelenting death:
In vain from war's alarms the fearful flies,
Swift it pursues, and by base wounds he dies.

Britain ne'er doubted which to chuse,
A glorious death, or shameful life;
To stoop to her insulting foes,
Or perish in the noble strife;
Secure, however fortune smile, or frown,
Unsullied honours shall her labours crown.

Great in herself, she scorns to rise,
By shameful stratagems; and hates
The vile deceitful policies
Which aggrandize the neighbouring states;
She smiles at all the vain designs they form,
And knows her thunder can disperse the storm.

Of France's schemes no dread she knows,
Their cunning is not worth our care;
Let them declare themselves our foes,
And be (if possible) sincere.
Their frowns we laugh at, and despise th' ally
Who wears the mask of friendship to destroy.

The thefts and insolence of Spain,
Too long the British lion bore,
Dreadful he shakes his shaggy main,
And nations tremble at his roar.
Tho' villains prosper, and revenge is slow,
Justice pursues, and will strike home the blow.
