Urge it no more:  For virtue, truth, nor fame,
Shall ever in my breast resume their sway,
All manly, gen'rous thoughts I now disclaim,
And chase the gaudy phantoms far away,
Which long my simple youth have 'guil'd astray.
Ah me!  too long by these inchanters led,
Fast have I follow'd their delusive song,
And deeds of hard emprize adventured,
To raise my name aloof the vulgar throng,
And fix my lofty worth the noblest ranks among.

Such were the fantasies which reign'd within,
And swell'd my bosom with their flatt'ring sound:
Each selfish view I deem'd a deadly sin,
And griev'd, whene'er I cast mine eyes around,
That publick love so scanty shou'd be found.
Blest be the man, who, firm to virtue's cause
Stood, emulous of Greece, or antient Rome:
Peace to their shades, and endless their applause,
Who sought her face when manhood first 'gan to bloom
In senates, camps, or courts; on scaffolds or the tomb.

But these illusions now I strive to banish,
Since reason, waxing ripe, assumes her throne,
(So Chanticleer's shrill pipe bids spectres vanish)
And sage experience, into wisdom grown,
Whispers, Be careful for thyself alone.
Why dost thou fondly seek another's good,
And open wide the charitable hand,
To fill the hungry poor with needful food,
To help the stranger on a foreign strand,
And spread thy bounties largely thro' the thankless land?

Ne mistereth, that thy head, of filling void,
Is conscious of its innocent desire,
For highest worth by envy is annoy'd,
Who hateth most where most she ought admire,
And lies perdue, to vent her bitter ire.
Hast thou not often felt her venom'd sting,
Blasting the fairest actions of thy life?
(Like the bleak north, which nips the buds in spring)
And wilt thou follow still th' unequal strife,
When foul ingratitude prepares her cank'rous knife?

Learn to be truly wise. &mdash; And mark me well,
The world is much too bad for thee to mend;
What boots one single drop, to fill a well?
Or one good man with millions to contend,
When all those millions shall oppose his end?
'Tis folly to dispute against the torrent,
And prudence warns thee to her safe retreat;
Algates thy soul to vice be most abhorrent,
Yet wisdom in concealment finds her seat,
Where, safe in virtue wrapt, I fain would lead thy feet.

Behold the man, who singly dar'd be brave,
When mountain ruffians delug'd from the west:
Nor wealth nor life the hero sought to save,
But publick zeal alone inspir'd his breast,
To quit his sweet repose, and happy rest!
In peace and joy, his days roll'd all along,
And each succeeding hour brought new delight;
But his high praise exceeds my humble song,
For ne'er was seen a more accomplish'd wight
In learning, wit, or parts; in courage, or in fight.

Oh Britain!  oh corrupt, degenerate isle!
No longer boast thy warriors endless train;
See, Glover droops, who once could gaily smile,
And count two millions ready from the plain,
If need requir'd, to punish haughty Spain.
Now, prophet, now!  a meaner host appears;
Call forth my myriads, and chastize the foe:
Alas!  the trembling nation owns its fears,
And a few robbers, rushing from their snow,
Can spread the nation round with flames, and blood, and woe.

None dare appear in arms.  The tottering land
Feels its own weakness, and consents to yield:
Yield to vilest, basest, filthiest band,
That e'er presum'd to seek the warlike field,
Or manly weapons in their hands to wield.
But Britain stands aghast, and cries for aid
To lubber'd Dutchmen, and fierce-whisker'd Hesse,
While her own dastard sons stare, all afraid,
And pallid cheeks reveal their deep distress,
And melancholy looks their anxious thoughts confess.

Then gently rising in his country's cause,
When proudest breasts were fill'd with huge dismay,
By freedom led, his generous sword he draws,
Nor could the dreadful perils him affray,
Or turn his footsteps form the toilsome way.
Chearful he marches thro' keen wintry storms,
In every danger, foremost still is found,
And each hard duty of the camp performs,
Till swarms of wild Barbarians whelm him round,
And with unnumber'd wounds, stretch lifeless on the ground.

Nor pomp, nor wealth, nor thirst of proud command,
Nor the vain lust of popular applause,
Nor splendid titles sounding through the land,
Nor aught which malice would addign the cause,
Engag'd the patriot to defend her laws.
Fair liberty, and truth, inspir'd the thought,
And Brunswick's virtues on the British throne,
Nor gold, nor honourable meed, he sought,
But shunn'd the croud, and chose to dwell unknown,
While his own conscious heart approv'd its deed alone.

And yet, e'en here &mdash; oh horrible to tell!
Even here can slander aim its rancorous spite,
And venom'd rage, and falshoods hot from hell,
With murdering wounds, to stab his fame unite:
Wounds, more severe than erst he felt in fight.
Such is mankind: &mdash; (How sunk beneath the breast,
Who honours and obeys his lord's commands?)
Such is mankind! &mdash; Nor canst thou spread a feast,
So grateful known in this accurst land,
As when some spotless fame lies slain by envy's hand.

Thus grey experience school'd her stripling ward,
And bad him popularity despise:
Come praise, or slanders, be thou still prepar'd,
Nor let thy spirits droop when tempests rise,
And learn alike to scorn the flattering skies.
Be steady, and be just &mdash; The youth obey'd,
Spending his days in peace and innocence;
But first to friendship's pow'r his offerings paid,
And prov'd this shameful truth, How dangerous is th' offence,
To shine beyond thy peers, in virtue or in sense.
