Yet once again, O muse, once more shake off
The long lethargick interval, and wake
To loud laments of woe:  hark!  how the bell
With sudden stroke, and slow alternate pause,
Give horror to the night, while ev'ry vale,
Each hollow bank that's wash'd by winding Cam,
Proclaims Eugenio gone!  Hail!  godlike youth,
My soul's blest, dearest half:  O say, what tears,
What praise best suits thee?  Late when Aegon dy'd,
Aegon, whose virtues, like sol's western ray,
Shone on me in decline; the solemn tale
Came o'er me like a pestilential storm
That blasts where'er it falls; my speech, my thought
At once forsook me; my suspended pulse
Forgot to beat, and life's impurpl'd stream
Froze up in cold obstruction. &mdash; Say, ye pow'rs,
Shall one so lately known, and lost so soon,
Be wept with frantick energy; and he,
Sweet friend, and partner of my early youth,
Fall unlamented, unadorn'd in song,
As tho' he ne'er had been?  Adieu!  Eugenio,
Than whom a swain more sweet and amiable,
With more distinguish'd worth, was never form'd,
In all the prodigality of nature,
Of gentle life and manners, of deportment
Mild, modest, graceful, of a conversation
Soft, and enriching as the falling dew.
He was in mind, in body, and in action
A fair epitome of every virtue.
But cease, O cease, ye elegiac tribe,
The customary farce.  His better shade
Nor wants, nor ought regards the worthless meed
Of venal verse; not, though ye breathe such strains,
As erst sweet Orpheus, son of harmony,
What time from forth their deep, sequester'd shades
The Fauns and Dryads, and coy mountain nymphs
Pour'd down the vale, and round the plaintive bard
Stood fast enthrall'd by musick's liquid chains.
At that fam'd hour, grave history reports,
Soon as he 'gan bewail his lov'd, his lost
Eurydice, the breath of each bold wind
Lay mute, and motionless; swift Hebrus' streams
Stop'd short in mid career.  Fantastick change
Spread her light pinions; contrarities
Turn'd similar, antipathy itself
Became most sympathetick; now the lamb
Couch'd dauntless by the listening lion's side,
That smooth'd his brindled crest; the fluttering dove
And eagle, mighty tyrant of mid air,
Perch'd on one bough.  Things erst inanimate
Started to life; tall Haemus' cloud-capt height
Bow'd low applause, and all the leafy audience
Wept tears of amber &mdash; O!  had heaven but spar'd
The godlike subject of my plaintive song,
Then had we hop'd to see, nor hop'd in vain,
Another Orpheus.  Oft beneath the shade
Of elm, oak, maple, or the spreading beach,
He sung fair Rosalind, and still his strains
Hang musical on ev'ry shepherd's ear.
Ah!  lov'd Eugenio, could the rain of eyes,
The garb's dark gloss, or, mind's more sable hue
Touch Pluto's iron soul, e'er now thy friend
Had melted to a fountain; but the gulph,
The mighty gulph between, that poets feign,
Once pass'd irremeable, holds thee back
With nine-fold fence for ever.  Then I'll weep
No more, but still I'll wear thee in my heart;
Lodg'd in that sacred center shalt thou rest,
Nor needs a better tomb.  Let Aegypt's sons
In all the pride of piety prepare
The dome, and pyramids fantastick height,
T' inshrine their lifeless kings; the vain attempt
Howe'er design'd, still, like the fabrick's self,
Ends in a point.  The impassive soul disdains
Her marble durance, swift she wings her flight
To revel in Elysium.  There, Eugenio,
I'll rest, and leave thee.  In those blissful shades
Musaeus, Orpheus, and the sacred soul
Of him who, like Iapetus' bold son,
Stole fire from heaven, await thee; haste thee then,
Dear youth, and fill the yet imperfect choir.
