Thrice have the Muses wept, the tuneful Train
Mourn'd their first Hopes in gentle SIDNEY slain.
While Spencer's pious Hand an Altar rears,
Preserves the Dirge, and consecrates the Tears:
FAULKLAND was next, nor civil Rage could tell
What urg'd his Fate, but wonder'd why he fell;
By Hyde's rich Genius are his Honours paid,
In grave Discourse of high Record display'd:
GRENVILLE the last, his precious Pledge the Nine
To thee their Priest, O Lyttelton, consign,
Thy Verse alone can satisfy the Dead,
And pay the glorious Price for which he bled.

A spotless Sacrifice in Beauty's Prime,
Fell the lov'd Youth, nor fell before his Time.
No Life is timely to the Coward Slave,
No Death untimely to the Free and Brave.
While with his Friends the Publick's Sorrows flow,
And each soft Eye adopts a Sister's Woe;
While Honour, Truth, and ev'ry sacred Name,
Fill the grand Chorus of his finish'd Fame,
Could Years have added more!  O envy'd Breath
Lost to thy Country!  O luxurious Death!
To such Desert such Praises to succeed,
Lives there a Wretch who would not wish to bleed?
Lives there? &mdash; But stop the Song, too much is past:
And may His Fate, Boscawen, be the last.

From thy try'd Fortune BRITAIN hopes to raise
A cheaper Triumph, and less guilty Bays,
And Bids thee take the Fasces of the Main,
And free fair Commerce from her servile Chain.
Already I behold thy Navy steer,
By other Stars, and gain upon the Year,
Where Seas impell'd by faithful Breezes roll,
And the broad Shadows shorten from the Pole;
With no proud Luxury, the Vessels groan,
The glorious Freight is Liberty alone;
That rare Exotick to a foreign Sky,
Which Britain gives, but India cannot buy.
At her Approach the Gaul shall hide his Face,
And herd for Shelter with a swarthier Race;
His spurious Sun no more shall rule the Day,
But set for ever in an Eastern Sea;
New Titles and strange Trophies shall be thine,
And Laurels cull'd beyond the Burning Line:
Go with these Auspices, and when thy Sails
Bend homeward, swelling with less Spicy Gales,
The Muse who mourn'd thy much lamented Friend,
With better Strains thy Triumphs shall attend;
Ev'n now she strives to raise the drooping Wing,
Essays her Harp, and meditates to sing;
While o'er these late so sad and joyless Plains,
Again smiles Phoebus, and a Stanhope reigns.
