Poor relict of my once known yellow store,
Must thou be chang'd, and I have gold no more?
To earn thee, oft I've exercis'd my brain,
Small the reward, but grateful was the pain;
Thou hast reliev'd the troubles of the day,
And sooth'd my soul whilst I in slumbers lay;
In storms at sea, and journeys on the land,
I had a friend, whilst I could thee command;
I've proved thy guide, and thou my ready guard,
And, that we now should part, is wond'rous hard.

Thou art a Charles &mdash; he was a gen'rous man,
But much he suffer'd e'er his reign began;
May that to me a change of fate portend,
May days of want in years of plenty end;
The image bears the greatness of his mind,
Here on this side you boast the herald's part,
But that's no cordial to a poor man's heart;
Here lions couch, and there a lion roars,
Men rage in want, and are serene in stores;
No fading thing in greatness can endure,
Who's rich to day, to morrow may be poor,
The harp there bends its melancholy strings,
Ah!  musick sadness to the thoughtful brings.

You guineas are good-natur'd easy folks,
Your principle no company provokes;
You have no conscience, tho' an human shape;
Are single dumb, but rattle in a heap:
You come with pleasure, and depart with pain,
As lovers meet, and take their leave again;
You court the worthless, and neglect the best,
As fools are most by flatt'ring knaves carest.
They keep you best, who least can you employ,
As eunuchs guard the fair they can't enjoy;
When most secure, you frequently are stole,
As accidents our purpos'd joys controul;
Of every virtue you supply the place,
Wit to the mind, and beauty to the face.
When thou art chang'd, exert for me thy pow'r,
In deeds a guinea ne'er essay'd before;
The world you know, each old acquaintance find,
Search every treasure, gather every friend;
Till shining bright with thousands in thy train,
Thou com'st triumphant to my purse again;
If monarch-like you bring attendant bands,
Thy praise shall echo from my busy hands;
And when whole heaps uncelebrated lie,
You shall be sung in verse that ne'er can die.
Alas!  this lecture can't my pains abate,
They still increase, as I thy power relate;
Sure, of my grief thou feel'st a friendly share,
While thus I sigh and on thy colour stare;
Thy sympathy I see, thy brightness fails,
And dimness o'er thy radiance now prevails.
'Tis thy compassion hinders thee to melt,
Since want, alas!  would then too soon be felt.
Tho' in fine artists seldom you delight,
And hate the poets with a mortal spite;
(An antient plaint!  deduc'd from time to time,
By the worst right, hereditary rhime;)
Yet now as conscious of my anxious pain,
Thou, pity tak'st, and gladly wou'dst remain:
Now nature calls, and that's a firm decree,
Then, precious piece, once more adieu to thee;
Ah!  bring a dram &mdash; the sympathizing glass
Trembles like me, and seems to share my case;
Pleasure, farewel, my guinea I deplore,
Who would not mourn, when he has gold no more?
O!  may we meet in more auspicious times,
When gold on gold shall strike harmonious chimes;
A sweeter sound than sympathizing rhimes.
We'll share the joys of a more blissful state,
And wonder at the various turns of fate;
Fortune with fortune pleasantly compare,
Experienc'd grow, and feast in purer air.
These silver shillings with less lustre shine,
Pale as my lips, few days will they be mine;
Ah!  then what shall my pockets fresh recruit,
To pay for lodgings, and a half worn suit?
Keep me from jail, be drink of ev'ry sort,
A slice of beef, sometimes a pint of port?
(Misers may quaff the foul insipid beer,
Nectar alone, a poet's soul can chear;
Like Hercules, by an immortal toil,
Give that rude monster, poverty, the foil;)
And (if the fates should disregard my pray'rs)
At least, a pipe afford, to whiff away my cares!
But now 'tis time that I begin to save,
For wine no gold a poet's pocket lines,
'Tis criminal to taste the juice of vines;
All money chang'd the less by changing grows,
And thro' our hands with silent wasting flows;
Like mercury when pour'd upon the floor,
Each stroke divides, and multiplies the store;
Methinks, I see these silver friends turn few,
And half-pence them, as they the gold pursue;
Already crowns to shillings have giv'n place,
And these assume the guinea's splendid grace;
Whilst one remains I will not quite despair,
Hope after hope shall still relieve my care;
And when they're spent, as dubious of my doom,
I'll even think what's of ev'ry piece become.
So men in health ne'er mind how time decays,
Nor what consumes the treasure of their days;
Till ebbing life is to the lowest wrought,
When forms of horror rise in ev'ry thought;
And in dark shades eternity appears,
One hour, one moment's worth a length of years;
In pangs the precious minutes past they view,
And dreading what's to come, would fain their days renew.
