Deep is the anguish which the tortur'd soul
Endures, when Passion struggles for command,
And Virtue labours to maintain her rule;
This Zeuma learn'd, by dire experience, when
His mournful Friend rehears'd th' ungrateful tale,
And fir'd his heart with jealousy and rage:
At first the Hero gave unbounded loose
To anger and revenge; then, calmly sad,
His fury ebb'd in silent tears away;
Strait, prompted by despair, he rav'd anew,
And threaten'd all the miseries of war;
Till Reason was again restor'd, and gave
A pause of quiet to his troubled mind.

Ogdar, with pitying eye, beheld his pain,
And trac'd the various tumult of his soul;
Then breath'd defiance to the Christian troops,
And urg'd th' event of battle to redeem
The beauteous Captive for her Lord:  yet he,
Supreamly Great and Good, disdain'd to risque
His Subjects safety, or, with frantick hast,
Attempt a private Justice, and o'erturn
The Publick good beyond retrieve:  but to
The Heav'nly Pow'rs referr'd his injur'd cause,
And, with dumb Sorrow, waited the Success.

Near to the City walls, and on the verge
Of an adjoining wood, with thickest boughs
Wide-shadowing, stood an ancient Structure, fam'd
For all the beauties of the Builder's art;
But envious Time, and unrelenting Age,
With slow decay, had worn the mould'ring Arch,
And shook the sculptur'd Column to it's Base:
Thick from the ground, and reaching to the roof,
Green Ivy crept along, and, wand'ring wide,
Embrac'd the antique Frame; within 'twas dark,
And dreadful all around; no beam of Day
Could e'er approach to gild the awful gloom,
Or glitter thro' the shade; but feeble Lamps,
For ever burning, twinkled from on high,
And stream'd a dubious Twilight thro' the Dome.
Here were their Gods ador'd with cruel rites,
And kneeling Kings, with human blood, aton'd
The errors of their Rule:  each Altar' long
Had been defil'd with such flagitious deeds,
And thousands of unhappy Men were made
The sacrifice of Hell; the pillars glow'd
With living Crimson, and the floor was heap'd
With strange variety of Bones; aloft
The Sculls of mighty Enemies were hung
In barb'rous Triumph; and grim Death appear'd
The Genius of the Place:  the nightly Priest
Oft fancied that the yell of injur'd Ghosts,
Swift-gliding thro' the dark, complain'd aloud
Of Cruelty, and Wrong; the Temple rung
With the distracting sound, and ev'ry vault
Breath'd out a dreadful Echo from below:
Far in the thickest shade, the deepest gloom,
Where Night, and Darkness hung eternal, Horror dwelt
Tremendously obscure, and, unreveal'd
To mortal gaze, for ages held her Reign,
In dreadful Solitude, silent as Death,
And secret as the Tomb; whence pale Amaze,
And shudd'ring Terror siez'd the luckless Wretch
Who haply wander'd to her dire Abode;
His Nerves relax'd, his Pulse, Voice, Heart forgot
Their office, and each property of Life
Was for a moment lost:  Anguish succeeds,
And apprehensions horrible as those
Of dying Sinners; when the nether World
Appears, with all it's torments, to their view;
A thousand Phantoms thro' the gloom arise
In dread array, and, with perpetual change,
Confuse his heated Brain; at last he sinks,
O'er-burthen'd with his Fears, and struggling dies
In Agonies beyond the reach of Thought.

Such was the scene of old, so dire the Place,
E'er Zeuma rose to empire, and forbid
The savage use of sacrificing Slaves,
Their fellow-creatures born; forbid the dire
Rejoycings o'er a vanquish'd Foe, and taught
The barb'rous Priest a Worship more Divine:
From that blest Period the devoted walls
No longer blush'd with human Blood; the bones
Of offer'd Victims were remov'd, and Death,
With all his Terrors, dar'd no more approach
The service of the Gods:  religious Dread
Alone remain'd to wake the heedless Wretch
From sublunary Bliss, and fix his thought
On Virtue, and the true Delight she gives.
Thus chang'd the venerable Pile became
A scene of Pleasure to the studious Soul,
Who, rapt in Contemplation, here forgot
The cares of Life, and, with increasing warmth,
Convers'd with Heav'n, and breath'd celestial Joy.
Here Zeuma oft retir'd, and, roll'd in dust,
Now humbly sought the favour of the Skies;
In bitterness of Soul lamenting lay,
And with excessive, agonizing Grief,
Revolv'd his Woes and mourn'd his wayward Fate.
When, (wonderful to tell) an easy Gale,
With strange, unusual sound arose, and, o'er
The moss-grown roof low murm'ring, gently shook
The nodding tow'rs; instant the sacred Lamps
Extinguish'd ev'ry blaze, and Darkness veil'd
The dusky scene.  'Twas Silence now,
And Zeuma's soul, in sad reflections, hung
On the Event; when Musick, from on high
Sweet warbling thro' the Dome, resounded soft,
And dy'd upon the Ear; while sudden Day,
In all it's glory, darted thro' the gloom,
And spread it's golden radiance all around:
At once he saw unmov'd the wond'rous blaze,
And (far beyond his Hope) an heav'nly Form,
Commission'd from above, to speak Content
To his distracted Thoughts, and lull his Cares
In Peace; for this intent, th' angelick Pow'r
Had sweetned all his visage into Smiles,
And ev'ry glance was wing'd with Love; he breath'd
Compassion for the sons of Men, and seem'd
Created for their Good; the rosy Morn
Was painted on his Cheek, and every charm,
Of blooming Youth, or manly Beauty, made
Him lovely as the Spring, when warmer Suns
Awake the freshening verdure of the Fields,
And gaily deck the smiling Earth with Flow'rs.

O Zeuma!  he began, from whence proceeds
This wild of Sorrows?  whence this pensive Fit
Of lonely musing, and heart-breaking thought?
Sure thy Virtue tow'rs above a private Woe,
And if the length'ning view of publick ills
Distract thy Reason, and, in deep Despair,
O'er-whelm thy better mind, recall thy Trust
On Heav'n, and the immortal Gods.  They hear
The sorrows of Mankind, and turn the vast,
Th' amazing Round of Life for Good, howe'er
It seems to mortal Eye:  thus warn'd, be Wise,
And, tho' ill Fortune should attend your Arms,
And grim Destruction wander thro' your Tribes
Unbounded, and at large, be firmly brave
And stand the Champion of thy country's Cause
In all Events; This is the duty of
A King, and what the just, th' almighty Gods
Will bless:  nor has the influence of Fate
Been more auspicious to the grov'ling Soul,
Who careless in the noise of Arms, neglects
The Publick Weal, and, to the Spoiler leaves
His helpless Realms a Prey.  Extend, in Thought,
Thy View beyond yon cloudy ridge of Hills,
And traverse the Peruvian plains:  see there
The Brother Kings, in bloody battle join'd,
Contend for Empire, and indulge the rage
Of dire Ambition, while these foreign Troops
Invade the Frontier, and, with speedy march,
Depopulate the Land:  deaf to the cries
Of a whole Nation, see!  the frantick Pair
Exhaust their mutual Strength in civil Broils;
Nor cease their Rage 'till one a Victim falls,
And yields the long-contended Throne:  but what
Avails the Conquest?  Lo!  the Victor rides,
In Triumph, to possess the fancied Joy,
And give his Passions an unbounded Loose:
But ah!  how vain the Thought?  caught in the Snare,
He laid himself, he falls by foreign Foes,
Unhonour'd, and unmourn'd:  Ruin succeeds,
And all the wide-extended-Kingdom groans
Beneath the weight of Slavery and Death.

Again indulge thy Soul, and o'er a Vast
Of varying Prospects, see the pompous rise
Of Mexico's proud tow'rs, where haughty Kings,
For ages, held their wide controul, and reign'd
Supreamly Great:  see there dread Cortez holds
A Monarch pris'ner, tho' surrounded with
Such numbers of his Guards; Amazing scene!
Th' effects of abject Cowardice and Fear:
See, the bold Stranger drains his Wealth, and awes
Him with his Frown:  but hark!  what murmurs run
Amid the Croud!  Suspicion, Phrenzy, Rage
Awake on ev'ry Brow, the sound of Arms
Rings horrid to the clouds, and dire Uproar,
Ascending loudly, thickens by degrees
And thunders all around:  with wild surprise
The Spaniards view the brooding storm approach
And meditate their Flight in vain:  for lo!
In Crouds on Crouds, innumerably large,
Their Enemies advance, and, mad with Wrongs,
Incessantly renew'd, besiege them round,
And sternly threaten a severe Revenge.
Cortez, amaz'd, and doubting the event,
Brings out his royal Captive to command
His Subjects into Peace:  the Monarch's voice
Is drown'd in the increasing Roar, their Rage
Redoubles, and, amidst a furious show'r
Of Stones, and Darts, he falls, their Monarch falls
The unhappy Victim of ungovern'd Crouds.
At length the Spaniard, in despair, resolves,
While Night involves the Skies, to force his Way,
Or perish in th' Attempt; he gives the Word,
And, laden with their Spoils, his Soldiers march
In Secrecy, and Silence from their Strength,
And hasten thro' the hostile Town; th' Allarm
Begins; the tribes assemble to the War,
And fright the Darkness with redoubled shouts
Of Conquest, and Revenge; a thousand brands
Flame hideous thro' the Gloom, and wav'd on high,
Display the lineaments of Wrath ingrav'd
On ev'ry Face:  with headlong Speed they fly
Upon their Foes, and charge their Front, their Flank,
And Rear at once; at once the  Spaniards, with
Undaunted Souls, return th' Attack from Rear,
Flank, Front, and, with amazing Courage, break
The cloud of War; the Streets are drench'd with Blood,
The Dying, and the Dead incumber all the Way;
A sad variety of Sounds, all dire,
And horrid, shade the vaulted Skies, the Earth
Reechoes dreadful from her in-most caves,
And Nature mourns the miseries of War.
At last the Morning dawns, and Cortez wins
A bloody Passage thro' the opposing Throng;
Loud sounds the Triumph of the joyful Tribes
Deliver'd from his tyrant Rule, and Death,
And Misery, give place to Joy:  but soon,
Too soon, the former scene returns, surcharg'd
With aggravated Ills; their inmate Foes
Besiege their Walls, and, o'er th wat'ry Lake,
Extend the dangers of the War; the waves
Are dy'd with reeking Crimson, and, along
The hollow shores, resounds the din of Arms;
Within pale Famine rages thro' the Streets,
And thousands dye heart-smitten with the Woes
She deals around, their ghastly Bodies lye
Corrupted by the mid-day Beam, their Friends,
And Parents, stupid with continual Toil,
Pass by regardless:  Plagues pollute the Skies,
And taint the sick'ning Air; who 'scapes the Sword
They kill, and Hunger slowly preys on all:
Complaints, and Curses, Pray'rs, and Groans ascend
Continual to the Stars, and wild Despair,
With griping anguish, tortures ev'ry Heart,
And glares in ev'ry Eye:  yet, obstinate
In Death, they scorn the overtures of Peace,
And mock the utmost efforts of their Foes.

Now, tir'd with vain attempts, the Christian Chief
Prepares to fire the City; see the flames
Ascend above the lofty tow'rs, and stream
Their fury to the skies; what clouds of smoak,
All dark and gloomy, dimly shade the day,
And blacken all below!  how loudly, hark!
How loudly roars the blaze!  what fearful cries
The frantick Habitants send up to Heav'n
In vain!  how vastly wide Destruction spreads!
How swift it rides upon the gale!  Down, down
The buildings fall, the Earth, convuls'd, beneath
The hideous Ruin groans, and Mexico
Lies all one smoaking Waste &mdash; Thus sinks the great,
The haughty Mistress of the western World,
And all her boasted Glory dies; and thus
A thousand States, of noblest Fame, are fall'n
To rise again no more; nor Peace, nor War
Was able to defend them on the brink of Fate:
If war became their choice, superiour Force
Prevail'd; if Peace, and ignobler Chains
Oppress'd the mourning Tribes. &mdash; Thus timely warn'd,
O Zeuma!  shun the gilded Snare, and trust
The Sword, and open arms; a Soldier ne'er
Should shrink from Death, and, where the War is just,
Eternal Honour waits upon his Shade.

In me behold the Genius of thy Realm,
And Guardian of thy Throne; to me belong
The care of Empires, and the fate of Kings:
If thou dost Honour to thy Name, with joy
I shall attend thy Rule; if not &mdash; This said,
Abrupt he paus'd, and while, in silent awe,
The Monarch listned to his lore, display'd
His starry wings, and soar'd away &mdash; So, when
The wand'ring Soul, in Dreams, excursive roves
Thro' fancied scenes of visionary Joy,
While the unfinish'd Rapture gently sooths
Th' attentive Thought, at once, with sudden shade,
The Landscape's darken'd, and we pensive mourn
Th' imaginary Loss in vain.  Mean time
Brave Ogdar, mourning the distress his Prince
Must suffer for Zirene's loss, and griev'd
For the abandon'd Maid, with restless thought
Explor'd a thousand ways to set her Free,
And give the King relief:  at length (his scheme
Compleat) he took th' advantage of the Night
To summon all his warriour Friends to aid
In the Design, and share, with him, the Praise.
Struck with the glorious Thought each gen'rous Mind,
With equal Ardour, join'd the brave Attempt,
And, like their Chief, resolv'd on Victory,
Or Death:  This done, they gladly flew to Arms,
And, thro' the sleeping Town, in Silence march'd
Away.  The youthful Hero led them on,
And, charm'd with the delightful hope of sure
Success, Joy brighten'd o'er his Face, and sense
Of Honour fir'd his heart.  He first essay'd
The gloomy Wood, and doubtful Brake; first pass'd
The dang'rous Ford, and, with unwearied Toil,
The upright Mountain scal'd:  his Ardour chear'd
The drooping Soul, and his Applauses gave
New Spirit to the Valiant, and resolv'd.

At last, the Foes Intrenchments, thro' the dusk,
Discover'd whit'ning o'er the Field; he paus'd
To let his Army breath; then, fir'd anew
By Friendship's holy Flame, immediate gave
The sign of Onset, and with eager Shouts
Began the dread Alarm; wide thro' the Dark
It sounds tremendous, and the neighb'ring Hills
Rebellow to the Noise:  with wild Amaze
The naked Spaniards tremble at their Fate,
And fight or fly in vain; so slaught'ring on
Stern Ogdar, like a furious Whirlwind, pass'd
To sad Zirene's tent, and left behind
A track of Ruin and a scene of Blood.
But there Almagro's Guard, a chosen band
Of hardy Warriours, stood t' oppose his Way,
And keep th' invaluable Prize their own.
For this, with Resolution arm'd, they bore
The dreadful Shock, and, where one Soldier fell,
Dreadless another still supplied his Room:
Horror, Confusion rag'd around; in heaps
The Combatants expir'd, and Death, at large,
Stalk'd o'er the Ruin; ev'ry moment views
The Tumult thicken, and the War increase,
'Till all the Camp appears one dreadful Scene
Of Violence and War.  So, when the gloom
Of brooding Tempests shades the World, down rush
The boist'rous Winds, and, o'er the nodding Woods,
Exert their Rage; this way, and that they bend
Before the Blast, and one continued Roar
Remurmurs all around.  Thus hung the Fray
In dubious scale, and, with uncertain Flight,
Long-doubting Conquest roam'd from side to side.

Mean time the sad Zirene, all dissolv'd
In sick'ning Sorrow, and aghast with Fear,
Heard all the din, and thunder of the War,
Uncertain who prevail'd; prone on her Bed,
Afflicted and forlorn, she pensive lay,
And look'd a lovely image of Despair;
Her Eyes, like Stars, reflected from the Wave,
Shone, thro' the standing Tears, with wat'ry Beams,
And down her Cheek, with brightest crimson bloom'd,
The pearly Tears, like Drops of morning Dew
On new blown Roses, stream'd their various Rays,
And glitter'd as they fell; a frequent Sigh
Disturb'd her balmy Breath, and with a Voice,
Broken with Grief, she murmur'd out her Woes;
Black as the Raven's wing, her flowing Hair
Shaded her Face, and, down her panting Breast,
In artless Ringlets negligently wav'd:
'Twas thus she lay, when (fearful least the dawn
Should disappoint his hope, and render vain
His toil) brave Ogdar broke the thick Array,
And rescu'd the lamenting Maid:  his Friends
Receiv'd her in their Arms, and Part, thro' all
The fighting Ranks, convey'd her Safe away;
While he, the last, with some remaining Troops,
Made good their Rear, and labour'd to secure
A safe Retreat:  a safe Retreat his Friends,
The faithful Guardians of Zirene, found;
But he, and the immortal Band that fought
With him, the firm companions of his Fate!
Were made the Victims of the War:  for now
Incens'd Almagro, raging for his Loss,
Came on with all his Strength, and fiercly charg'd
The dreadless Hero, who, with cheerful Words,
Encouraging his little troop, return'd
The furious Onset with amazing Warmth;
And, in Despair of Safety, dealt around
Such bloody marks of terrible Revenge,
As prov'd his Valour equal to his Cause:
At last, o'er-wearied with a length of Toil
And circled with an hostile Round, he fell
The Honour of the Field; Yet, ev'n in Death,
He glory'd to have serv'd his Prince, and thought
His Life well sacrific'd for such a Friend.

Mean time the Morn, impurpling up the skies,
The Sun began his wonted round; when, sick
Of mid-night Cares, and interrupted Dreams,
Great Zeuma rose to breath the spicy Air,
And find in Solitude the tranquil Joys
To kingly Courts deny'd; no cumb'rous Train
Of mercenary Slaves was e'er allow'd
To wait the thoughtful Hour, or shield him from
Himself; no dread of home-bred Foes disturb'd
His dauntless Mind; and Innocence alone
Was all his Guard:  thus was the cheerful Morn
Enjoy'd, when Peace, and Pleasure jointly gave
A blessing to his Rule; and thus, amid
The terrors of a dang'rous War, he sought
Relief among the dew-dipt Flow'rs, and breath'd
Up frequent Pray'rs upon the scented Breeze.

'Twas thus he was employ'd, when from the brow
Of a green eminence, adorn'd with trees,
And all the joys of Nature, he beheld,
At distance marching o'er the plain beneath,
An hasty Crowd that, in the guise of War,
Appear'd the Convoy of some precious Charge,
And fearful of pursuing Ill:  intent
He gaz'd, and felt, as nearer it approach'd,
Unusual tremblings flutter round his Heart;
A thousand Charges, with alternate rule,
O'erspread his Face, and ev'ry Glance proclaim'd
The doubtful Passions of his Soul:  at last,
Convinc'd that 'twas his dear Zirene came,
In safety and at large, to chear his sad,
Uncomfortable Hours with Love, he ran,
He flew to her Embrace; and she, all Fair,
And blushing like the purple Dawn, with like
Impatience hastens to his Arms, and gave
A loose to all the soft emotions of her Heart.
Awhile, encircled in the am'rous Fold,
They stood unable to express the vast,
The wond'rous Pleasure they enjoy'd, and Tears,
In mingling streams and mutual silence, flow'd
Down either Face; at length, in broken Starts&mdash;
And interrupted Sounds, together Both
Began to speak, and all their talk was Love:
A thousand times he bless'd the heav'nly Powers
For such a sweet return of Bliss, and she
As often bless'd the happy Hour that freed
Her from her Woes, and gave her back to him:
'Twas Joy and Triumph all around, no mark
Of Grief, no dread of Danger now remain'd,
But Acclamations, and Applause were heard
From ev'ry Tongue, and, in a gen'ral shout,
Wide spreading, circled thro' the air; the Town,
Alarm'd with the delightful News, pour'd out
It's num'rous Tribes to gratulate their King,
And welcome his illustrious Bride; with Flow'rs,
Sweet smelling, they perfum'd the Way, and shook
The echoing Skies with hymeneal Songs;
The holy Priests, with artful Musick, join'd
The gladsome Verse, and sweetned ev'ry Lay:
Behind the youthful Monarch led his lov'd
Zirene thro' the gazing Throng, and seem'd
Entranc'd in extacies of Joy; while she,
In artless Modesty, and virgin Pride,
Conceal'd the Pleasure of her Heart, and heard,
Unmov'd, the murm'ring Croud admire her Charms,
And bless their Prince's Choice &mdash; The Temple now
Receiv'd the glad Procession, and the Priests
Began the nuptial Vow; when, struggling thro'
The cluster'd throng, appear'd a man who seem'd
But just escap'd the rage of Battle, and grown pale
With frequent wounds; with rev'rence he approach'd
Th' attentive King, and thus began, &mdash; My Lord!
The faithful Ogdar, who, e'er morning light,
Deliver'd this fair Princess from her bonds,
Is now no more; all cover'd o'er with blood
He dy'd in battle, like a Hero dy'd,
And, with his latest Breath, rejoyc'd that Fate
O'ertook him in the Field, and while he fought
For Heav'n and you:  with him his valiant Friends
Lye breathless on the Ground, and I alone
Was spar'd; was spar'd, amid the rage of war,
To bid Defiance to your Pow'r, and threat
A bloody Vengeance  o'er your forfeit Realm,
Unless you will restore the captive Maid
Before to morrow's Dawn, and purchase Peace
On such disgraceful Terms.  This said he ceas'd,
And Zeuma, thunder-struck at such a dire
Reverse of Fate, stood like a Statue pale,
And motionless &mdash; His Eyes forgot to roll,
His heart to beat; the nuptial Garland dropt
Unheeded to the ground, and, thro' his Veins,
Chill Horror roll'd it's icy Tides:  while sad
Zirene hung her drooping Head, like Flow'rs,
Rude-shaken in a wint'ry Gale; Despair
Sat musing on her Brow, and silent Grief
Hung heavy on her Soul; short Tremblings shook
Her limbs, and, down her livid cheek, the Tears
Fell frequent, and betray'd the anguish of
Her Thought:  around mute Wonder seiz'd the Crowd,
And, gazing on the luckless Pair, they stood
Companions in their Woe; a gale of Sighs
At once ascended  thro' the Dome, at once
A peal of Groans remurmur'd from beneath,
For all were grie'vd: &mdash; So highly they esteem'd
Their King, so much a Monarch may command
His People's Hearts by deeds of Amity
And Love &mdash; At length, recov'ring from a Wild
Of sad reflections, the unhappy Prince
Thus plain'd aloud &mdash; O Ogdar!  O my Friend!
How fatal has thy fond Affection prov'd
To thee and us!  Deform'd with ghastly Wounds
Thy dear Remains, deny'd the funeral Rite,
Must press the sanguine Field, thy flitting Soul,
Without one last Adieu, is forc'd away
To other Worlds uncertain, and unknown;
Nor thine alone, a Thousand more are fled,
Are fled for me; for me, whom Heav'n design'd
Their Guard; O mournful Tale!  imprudent Friend!
To risque such gallant lives for me:  But ah!
'Tis past, 'tis past, and sorrow flows in vain.

Enough, my People!  has Destruction rag'd,
Enough have Arms, and Violence laid wast
Our mournful Fields; the wish'd occasion's come
To cease their Outrage, and restore the joys
Of Peace, once more your own:  My Life, my Soul,
My lov'd Zirene will remove your Woes,
And be the Victim of so bless'd a Change;
With us will save her hoary Father's Age
From like Misfortunes, and her native Land
From Misery and War; I know her Heart
Too virtuous to refuse so just, so brave
A Sacrifice, and too resolv'd to shrink
From so severe a Tryal, tho' one scene
Of endless Sorrow cloud her future days.

'Tis true my Happiness has long been fix'd
On her, and her alone; in her dear Arms
I'd center all my joys to come, and, when
I loose her &mdash; Death and Darkness are behind.
But shall a King neglect the Publick good,
Committed to his Charge, to serve his own?
Forbid it Heav'n, and all ye juster Pow'rs!
Ah!  sooner would I groan beneath the whole
Enormous weight of human Ill, as now
Must be my Fate, nor murmur at the Load.

You see, my lovely, my afflicted Fair,
To what extreams of Sorrow we're reduc'd,
And what's the Duty of a King &mdash; Alas!
She faints &mdash; she dies &mdash; the Queen of Beauty dies.&mdash;
Ye holy Men assist her with your Care,
Recal her parting Soul, that she may live
Again, and bless th' applauding World with Peace.&mdash;
For me, I'm lost in Passion, and one Touch,
Of that enchanting Form, would fire my Heart
With a resistless Flame; &mdash; ev'n while I gaze
I feel my Virtue melt before her Charms,
And pow'rful Love resume it's wonted rule:&mdash;
But see!  she breaths!  she lives!  and, like the dawn
Of Light returning o'er the World, her Eyes
Regain their usual Rays; but &mdash; lost to me
They shine! &mdash; My Life must be one constant Round
Of Night, and Horror, till the hand of Death
Shall lead me to the Grave &mdash; Oh!  had we been
The meanest Subjects that revere a Crown,
We had been Happy; now &mdash; Choak'd with the grief,
Which he had long controul'd, he could no more,
But, sinking on the Earth, indulg'd his Tears,
And gave a lose to all the Anguish of his soul.

Struck to the Heart, with such a scene of woe,
From eye, to eye the soft Infection ran
Thro' all the Crowd, and one continu'd stream
Of Sorrow sadden'd ev'ry Face.  At length,
When the decreasing torrent ebb'd away,
And Nature was reliev'd, brave Ogdar's sire
Up rose amid the mourning Tribes, not like
A tender Father weeping o'er his Son,
But like a Heroe whose undaunted soul
Disdain'd the utmost rage of Fate; and thus
Began &mdash; "The tears you've shed, illustrious Prince,
For happy Ogdar's fate, in full reward
The greatest services of Life; and since
He fell so bravely, for so good a King,
I glory in his end; 'twas Duty well
Perform'd, and what will gild his future Name
With Honour, while the World endures &mdash; But shall
A brave Man dye in vain!  so fair a Form!
So pure a Soul as this lov'd Princess boasts,
Be prostituted thus to sordid slaves,
Whose Love is Lust, whose God is Gold, and who
Pursue Mankind with all the rage of Hell:
Ah no!  good Heav'n forbid, and all the Pow'rs
Above.  If you, in justice to your Charge,
The Guard of Nations, sacrifice to Ease,
And Pleasure of your Days; can we behold
You languish in  your Bloom, and not prevent
The fatal Malady, or prove our selves
Well-worthy of a Monarch so divine?
No sure; the Gods, in honour to your rule,
With kindred virtues have endow'd our Souls;
And 'tis for us to justify our Rights
By war, and guard our Heroe to the Field&mdash;
Then be again your Self, and let the Sword
Defend what Arms would force away; made yours
By Right, by Conquest, and eternal Vows.
Nor are we yet undone; another pause
Our Fate allows; and shall we lose by Peace,
Ignobly bought, that Liberty which War
And Battle may secure, the Joy of Life!
And Idol of the brave?  mourn we the Slain
Of this unhappy Morn?  my dearest Son,
Still bleeding, lies the foremost of the Heap;
Yet should these Eyes, with one small Drop, Lament
His glorious Fate, I'd tear them from their Orbs
And view the face of Heav'n no more &mdash; Then rouze,
My Sovereign, from this sullen Trance, and lead
Us on, secure of Conquest, and Revenge:
The Ghosts of slaughter'd Armies point the way,
And shout around us for Revenge; the Gods
Themselves invite us to th' expecting Field,
And thunder from the Skies, Revenge, Revenge."

He said, and, with immediate sound, Revenge,
Revenge, ran echoing thro' the Dome, nor ceas'd
The hideous Murmur 'till the King arose,
Again resolv'd to trust th' event of War;
And fair Zirene, by the nuptial Rite,
Was giv'n for ever to his longing Arms.

