'Tis hard for man, bewilder'd in a maze
Of doubtful reas'nings, to assign the cause
Why heav'n's all-ruling pow'r, supremely just
And good, shou'd give Iberia's cruel sons
Unbounded leave to travel o'er the globe,
And search remotest climes; to stretch their sway
Thro' all the western world; to exile Peace
And Liberty, with all their train of joys
From the afflicted lands; and proudly vex
Th' unhappy nations with oppressive rule.

&mdash;In ages past, as time revolv'd the year,
'Twas all a round o innocent delights:
The fearless Natives rarely heard of war
And its destructive ills; Famine, Disease,
And all the various plagues of other realms,
Were there unknown:  life was a constant scene
Of harmless pleasures; and, when full of days,
The woodland-hunter and the toiling swain,
Like ripen'd fruit that, in the midnight shade,
Drops from the bough, in peace and silence sunk
Into the grave.  But when the Spanish troops,
In search of plunder, crowded on the shore,
And claim'd, by right divine, the sovereign rule,
Another scene began; and all the woes,
Mankind can suffer, took their turns to reign.
Wide-ranging slaughter crimson'd o'er the field,
With streaming blood, and Death in triumph rang'd
Along the desolated wast; the light
Of heav'n was conscious of such horrid crimes,
As sicken human nature to relate,
And make ev'n Guilt asham'd.  The shades of night,
Afforded only priviledge to mourn
And Sorrow waited on the gloom:  but in
The midst of ruin the advent'rous tribes
With souls undaunted by approaching fate,
Oppos'd their haughty inmates with a zeal
Well worthy Liberty, and Fame; appear'd
Their country's champions in the front of war,
And dy'd by thousands for the publick good.

O Zeuma, thy immortal deeds remain,
As deathless trophies, to inform mankind
How princes should espouse their peoples cause;
And what eternal glory's the reward
Of virtue so sublime.  O that like warmth
My animate the muse, who tunes her voice
To Liberty, the best, the darling gift
Of bounteous heaven!  the joy of all mankind!

Beyond the vast Peruvian realms, whose wealth
Supports th' Iberian throne, and freights whole fleets
To Europe's hostile strand; a wond'rous ridge
Of cumb'rous hills, vast, huge, and pil'd abrupt,
Ascend above the clouds, and bound the view
From sky to sky; aloft bleak Winter holds
Eternal reign, and from the mountain's brow,
All cover'd with ice, and white with snow
Looks hideous down; breaths out his chilling gales,
And the sad Wand'rer freezes to the ground,
A ghastly statute, with the dread of death,
Still grav'd upon his face; sometimes he bids
The whirlwind roar, and with destruction wing'd
Impels it on the realms below, and oft,
Assembling clouds on clouds, draws o'er the world
A midnight darkness; and with sudden gush
Pours down the rain in dreadful show'rs, and drowns
The hope of harvest on the field.  Where ends
This rocky chain, succeeds a dreary length
Of barren sands, torn up by ev'ry wind,
And rowl'd in heaps, like the vext billows
On the stormy main:  around, a frightful, wild,
And horrid prospect, tires the lab'ring eye
In gazing for it's end.  No vernal green
E'er chears the yellow wast; no bubbling spring
It's cooling azure rolls along; no rains,
Nor kindly dews refresh the burning soil;
But Nature looks as crumbled into dust;
And Ruin sole possessor of the void.

Yet, on the steril desart's utmost verge,
And the rude mountain's skirt, the Spaniards found
A land of plenty, where enliv'ning Spring
And fruitful Autumn, with alternate change,
Rejoyc'd the year; where wealth immense (the hope
And end of all their execrable deeds,)
Was found in earth's dark womb, and ev'ry joy
Invited their abode.  Such Peru was;
And when, subjected to their arms, it's tribes
Became the vassals of their pow'r, athwart
This ridge of mountains thy pursu'd
Their way to conquest, and, in Chili's realms,
Resolv'd to fix their arbitrary rule,
Tho' Death in all it's horrid forms oppos'd
Their common toil, and not a soul return'd
In safety from the war.  There Zeuma reign'd,
A prince, who in the opening bloom of youth,
Prefer'd his country's welfare to his own;
Who, night and day, with an unwearied care,
Employ'd his hours to benefit mankind,
And study their content; who drew the sword
With a reluctant hand; and, tho' 'twas just,
With tears, bewail'd the miseries of war;
Who liv'd his country's darling and defence,
The boast of human nature, and the joy
Of nations that rever'd his growing worth,
And idoliz'd his name.  'Twas thus he liv'd,
'Twas thus he was ador'd, while downy Peace
And smiling Liberty indulg'd his rule,
And bless'd his people with continual joy.
Yet not the softness of a Court, nor all
The sweets of Peace, could lure his stedfast soul
From Virtue, or with impious pleasures taint
His manly mind.  Lone Contemplation fill'd
His leisure hours, and gave him clearer views
Of kingly duty, and well-grounded fame:
Or toilsome exercise improv'd his health,
And gave new vigour to his limbs:  by dawn
He rose to haunt the trembling Deer, or rouze
The Panther from his den:  he, first, attack'd
The wrathful Savage, and with lifted spear
Provok'd his utmost rage:  he, first, pursu'd
The fleeting Hind, and with unerring dart
O'er took his flight, and stretch'd him on the green.

Once, as with ardent zeal he urg'd the chace,
And press'd, with matchless swiftness, to secure
His frighted prey, thro' the thick wood, from far
He spy'd, low-bending o'er the limpid stream,
An aged Hermit; who seem'd wrapt in thought
And solitary muse; behind him, arch'd
By nature in the hollow rock, appear'd
A gloomy cave, o'ergrown with moss, his calm
Abode; above, with difficult ascent,
Arose the hill, with vivid verdure crown'd;
Around, the forest spread it's grateful shade,
And gently murmur'd to the gale; beneath
Spontaneous flow'rs adorn'd the grassy turfe,
And sweetned ev'ry breeze:  long gaz'd the King
On the enchanting scene, and wonder'd much
It had 'till then escap'd his haunt; when, wak'd
By his approaching step, the Father rose,
And with meek rev'rence thus began.  "'Tis not,
Great Prince, by accident you've stray'd to this
Sequestered place, but by divine decree;
That you may know what instant dangers threat
Your rule, what miseries your realms;
That no surprize enervate your resolves
When war alarms you to the field; no dread
Of Stranger Nations, or unusual arms
Confuse your routed squadrons o'er the plain."
He said, and led him, by a winding way,
To the high brow of that delightful hill,
And bid him view the prospect round.  He look'd,
And lo!  the whole world's globe seem'd stretch'd along
Before his view, so far the landscape reach'd,
So many objects crowded on the eye;
On this side cities stand, and forests wave,
Green fields extend, and gentle rivers glide;
O'er hanging precipices frown, and hills
Ascend on high:  on this the white sea foams,
And on the nearer shores, with speedy roll,
Breaks wide it's hasty billows.  Zeuma starts
At the surprizing roar, yet still intent
Beholds the restless wave, when, new and strange!
High-tossing on the ang'ry surge appear
Vast floating Piles, that with capaceous wings
Collect the breathing gale, and by degrees
Approach the strand; with thund'ring voice discharge
Huge streams of ruddy flame, in cloudy smoak
Involv'd, and fright the nations round.  Again
The Monarch starts, astonish'd at the noise,
While, down their steepy sides, descend a throng
Of bearded men, of foreign look and mien;
That brighten o'er the plain with shining arms,
And all the pomp of war.  To them succeeds
An heard of Creatures, fierce and active, train'd
To battle, and the din of arms; on which
The Warriors mounting, all proceed, in firm
And regular array, across the field;
Then found a charge; and o'er the tranquil glebe
Let loose destruction, and with slaughter glut
The sword; with dire, oppressive force, and stern
Dominion fix their barb'rous rule, and lord
It o'er the groaning tribes.  With horror struck,
Sad Zeuma overlook'd the scene, and mourn'd
The dire event:  when thus the hoary Sage
His lore renew'd, "These are the foes that now
Are marching to invade your land; and such
The ills that must afflict your tribes; see o'er
Yon ridge of hills, contemning all the force
Of freezing cold, and wintry gales, they pass
Unweary'd with the toil:  then hast away,
Alarm your people, and with princely care
Draw all your squadrons to the field.  If ought
Of doubt yet hangs upon your mind,
Again survey the landscape, and believe
My Mission from above."  He look'd, and all
Th' illusive prospect vanish'd from the view,
And nought remain'd, but one vast length of wood,
That murm'ring bow'd before the wanton gale.

So, where the setting Sun, with upward ray
Adorns the ev'ning clouds in fleecy gold,
And purple deeply dy'd, th' attentive eye,
With wonder, views a maze of objects drawn
In bright confusion o'er the blue sky's edge,
And with a round of never ceasing change
Perplex the doubtful scene, 'till Night's deep shade,
Ascending swiftly darkens o'er the heavens,
And in grey vapours sweeps the whole away.
Heart-pierc'd with horrour at the dreadful view
Of such impending ills, the anxious King
With timely care revolv'd the surest means
To guard his people and secure his throne.
For this intent, he summon'd all his chiefs,
The Sage in councils, and the Great in arms,
To wise debates; and whilst the hoary head
Essay'd the means of peace, inspir'd the youth
With warlike ardour, and heroick warmth,
Inur'd their manly limbs to constant toil,
And, by example, taught them to subdue
Their passions, and forget the love of ease;
Describ'd the warlike Steed ('till then unknown)
His wond'rous swiftness and amazing strength;
The dreadful Engines, whence immediate death,
In Fire and Thunder, forc'd resistless way,
And all the wonders that conspir'd to give
Eternal conquest to the Spanish arms;
But pictur'd all with such surprizing art,
As gave new spirit to his troops, and fir'd
The youthful Heroes with impetuous zeal
To prove their valour on their Country's foes,
Or dye in the attempt.  Mean time, oppress'd
With war and death, the neighb'ring nations mourn'd
Their captive state, and, flush'd with long success,
The haughty Victors, with unbated rage,
Prepar'd to hurl the Monarch from his throne,
And desolate his realms.  But first, essay'd
The force of threatnings; and, in haughty terms,
Demanded both his treasures and his crown,
As sent of Heav'n, and favour'd by the Gods.
The prudent Prince, with patience heard the boast,
And then return'd, "That for his People's sake,
He offer'd peace on honourable terms;
But such refus'd, 'twas Justice to defend
His charge by Arms and violence, from the rage
Of barb'rous men, and call the injur'd Gods
To vindicate themselves."  Highly enrag'd
At this reply, Iberia's vengful chief,
The fierce Almagro, hasten'd to subdue
His stubborn virtue, and at once began
All the dread mischiefs of the Sword.  Then fled,
Affrighted at the hideous din, soft Peace
And smiling Liberty, to other climes,
And bless'd those lands no more.  Then, dire Despair
And galling Tyrany usurp'd the rule,
Unbounded, and at large; ev'n Death appear'd
A kind reprieve from more tremendous ills,
And Life too burthensome to bear.  Yet then
Brave Zeuma, with undaunted soul, resolv'd,
To stand his country's champion, and defend
It's ancient Freedom, 'till one common fate
Should end the People and their King.  For this,
With wily caution he appear'd in arms,
And shun'd the combat in the open plain;
Least, fighting on unequal terms, his troops
Should fly, inglorious, from the field; for this,
Withheld his own heroick warmth, and taught
His trembling Subjects, by degrees, to bear
The Neighing Courser and the Gun discharg'd,
That, when the wish'd occasion should arise,
He might with Courage, front his vaunting foes,
And, to advantage, carry on the War,

So, when the rav'nous Lion, stung from want,
Forsakes th' unfruitful wild, and o'er the plains
With plenty crown'd, loud roaring seeks his prey,
The anxious Huntsman rouzes at the sound,
And kindles all the ardour of his soul;
Yet wisely shuns his open fury, at least
Th' intended fate should be his own, and, hid
In gloomy coverts, meditates the wound.

'Twas Summer now, and the approaching Sun
Drove thro' the vault of heav'n his nearer orb,
And, on the sick'ning earth directly stream'd
His rays &mdash; Intolerable heat at Noon
In all its fury rag'd; the slumb'ring winds,
Unactive, hover'd in mid-air; the woods
In silence slept, and not a breath disturb'd
The stream; the torrid hours forbid the toil
Of arms and battle, 'till the ev'ning shades
Advanc'd, and fresh'ning gales, with dewy wing,
Blew gently o'er the world.  'Twas then th' enrag'd
Almagro, weary of the lengthen'd war,
Resolv'd t' attack the adverse troops, within
Their lines, and force them to the field.  Between
The hostile camps, an headlong current pour'd
It's crystal wave, and, with wide-wand'ring stream
Refersh'd the neighb'ring meads.  On either side,
In frequent combats, the contending bands
Had skirmish'd, to essay their mutual strength,
And various fortune waited ev'ry fray.

In happyer days, when Peace and Plenty pour'd
Their blessings on the glebe, these blissful fields
Had been the haunt of Innocence and Joy:
Here each returning Spring, th' assembling tribes,
With rural pleasures crown'd the day, and breath'd
The fragrance of the evening breeze; here, tun'd
Their sweetest songs, and in the moonlight shade
Indulg'd the am'rous tale; the purple morn
Return'd but to renew their happiness,
And each gay minute flew along surcharg'd
With new delights; while Sorrow, Care, and Pain
At distance how'd, nor with unhollow'd tread
E'er ventur'd to molest the gladsome Round.

&mdash;But now, another scene commenc'd; the trumpets rung
Th' allarm of battle, and the mingl'd sounds
Of war and tumult, thicken'd on the winds.
Fir'd by Ambition, and desire of Gold,
Th' Iberian squadrons, rang'd in meet array,
Begin their march along the trembling green,
And tow'rds the Rivers, slowly moving, bent
Their dreadful progress, pleas'd with Arms and Blood.
Almagro at their head, with gloomy pride,
And savage, surly glance, portending dire
Destructions to his foes, rode haughtily on
And, like his troops, with barb'rous joy revolv'd
The ensuing slaughters that must drench the plains.

&mdash;So rises, red, and furious o'er the earth,
A baleful Comet, and, athwart the skies,
Extends a length of blaze; thro' all it's course
Streams down a thousand woes, and, to the verge
Of Heav'n's expansion, frights the gazing Worlds.

Mean time, dread Zeuma, from afar, survey'd
Their first approaches, and, with prudent haste,
Commanded out his army to the field;
Gave ev'ry chief his portion of the war,
And with a noble fierceness fir'd their souls:
Then, waving high his hand, 'twas silence all,
And calm, profound attention, while he said.

"My fellow-souldiers, Country-men, and Friends,
To-day, just Heav'n has arm'd us to assert
Our native Freedom, and redeem our soil
From these outrageous sons of Guilt and blood,
Who change the face of Nature, with their wrongs,
And study to undo Mankind; who claim
Possession of our All, and would destroy
Our very Names:  methinks, the dire attempt
Should rouze us to revenge, and arm the World
To join in such a cause.  The Gods themselves
Should fight for us, and thunder on our foes
Their utmost fury, and extreamest rage.
O think, my Sons, with what a weight of woe
Your native land must groan, if your forget
Her dang'rous state, or fail in her defence.
I dread the thought; Distraction must attend
A pain so great, and Horrour, that would freeze
A Nation into Statutes &mdash; But no more&mdash;
It cannot be, when Heroes such as you
Maintain their Country's cause, and long to prove
Their souls superiour to their Fate.  Behold
Yon chrystal stream; 'tis there we must exert
Our utmost valour, and dispute the ford,
'Till Death or Conquest terminate the fray.
I lead you on, and share alike with you
The utmost danger of the day."  He ceas'd,
And shouts, like thunder in redoubled peals,
Rung to the skies, and echo'd all around;
Immediate courage flam'd in ev'ry soul
And brighten'd ev'ry eye; the din of arms,
And all the instruments of war succeed;
A thousand banners, gay with inwrought gold
And sparkling gems, stream'd to the setting Sun,
And lighten'd all the fields.  Down to the stream
They march, in thick embody'd crouds, and shake,
Beneath their thund'ring footsteps, all the meads.

So e'er the Earth-quake heaves the trembling soil,
And rocks the drowzy world, a rumbling sound
Runs thro' it's hallow womb, presaging ill,
And all the nations shudder at the noise.

Now stood great Zeuma on the river's brink,
The foremost of his troops; his stature tall
Above the common size of men, his face
The image of a King lovely in smiles,
In frowns majestick as a God; the blush
Of ripen'd manhood glow'd upon his cheek,
His eye-balls flam'd with living fire, sublime
His front, and, o'er his face, true courage seem'd
To heighten ev'ry charm; above, his helm,
Adorn'd with plumes and cover'd o'er with gems,
Dazled the eye, his right-hand strongly grasp'd
A pond'rous spear, his left sustain'd a shield,
Illustrious as the Day:  behind him throng'd
(With brave impatience for the fatal hour)
A crowd of noble Youths, whose utmost joy
Was ever to be near their Lord, and fight
Or dye with him:  Not such whom servile Pay
Had made his friends, but Virtue like their own.
At last their foes drew near, and, on the verge
Of fate, a moment paus'd, then, rang'd anew,
At once the signal sounded to engage,
And, rushing to the stream, impetuous down
The hostile squadrons plung'd; at once the waves
Were cover'd o'er with men, and foaming white
Ran troubled to the shore; the dreadful roar
Of iron Enginry was heard around,
And all the dire concomitants of War.
Stun'd, frighted at the sound, the Indian troops
Start back appall'd, dire horrour sinks their hearts,
And shakes in ev'ry limb; with frantick eye
They upwards gaze, and trembling think the Heav'ns,
Amidst a thousand thunders, tumbling down
With hideous ruin, and all Nature's frame
Dissolv'd.  Ev'n Zeuma's stedfast soul
Recoil'd at the tremendous noise; but soon
Recover'd from the sudden dread, again
He stood resolv'd, and, thro' the tim'rous host,
Infuz'd a blaze of courage, like his own.
&mdash;The Spaniards, eager to attain the shore,
Fought from below with never ceasing toil,
And crowded to ascend in vain.  For there
The dauntless Heroe, hanging o'er the flood,
Repuls'd their broken squadrons, and, in heaps,
O'erwhelm'd them in the waves.  Anger, Revenge,
Despair, and Rage, in dreadful forms appear'd
To either host, and dealt destruction round.
Fainting with wounds, and stifled in the stream
A thousand luckless wretches meet their end;
Drove by the side their mangled bodies float,
A dreadful prospect!  to the neighb'ring shores;
And red, for many a league, the waters roll
A bloody wave.  But now, advancing wide,
Increasing Darkness shadow'd o'er the skies;
Yet still the dubious battle madly rag'd,
And Slaughter rang'd from host to host, more dread
And furious than before.  The awful gloom,
That hung the heav'ns, with sacred terrour fill'd
The boldest heart, and, o'er the armies, spread
Confusion ev'n more terrible than Death.
Yet not a soul retreated from the war,
Or murmur'd at his fate; but, all resolv'd
On Victory, again renew'd the fight
With double ardour, and whole heaps expir'd.
At length the Moon, ascending from behind
The earth's remotest hills, roll'd up the skies
Her silver orb, and o'er the horrid scene
Shed down her welcome rays; when Zeuma griev'd
That Justice waited on his arms in vain,
Survey'd th' approaching ruin of his cause,
And, with afflicting thought, in hast revolv'd
Th' increasing danger of the lengthen'd fray.
Compassion soon prevail'd, and thro' the field
He sounded a retreat, alas too late!
For, lifeless on the ground, full half his strength
Lay roll'd in dust, and blood; and what remain'd
Was scatter'd o'er the field, breathless, fatigu'd,
Unable to resist their conqu'ring foes.
Yet, rouzing all the courage of this soul,
He gather'd his remaining troops, and gave
Commandment to retire; himself the last,
All cover'd o'er with blood, secur'd the rear
And sav'd them from their fate.  The victor Troops
Then gain'd the long-contended field, and faint
With labour, weariness, and wounds, encamp'd
Immediate on the hostile strand; nor dar'd
To venture a pursuit:  while, sore perplex'd
With all the torture, all the agony of mind,
A prince so zealous for his country's good
Could suffer, Zeuma, thro' surrounding shades,
And gloomy woods, escap'd; and, by the first
Approaches of the morning light, repos'd
His drooping train within Comagua's walls.
Where, still undaunted at his evil fate,
He summon'd all the forces of his realm,
And with sage counsel, and mature advice,
Plann'd out the future conduct of the War.

Mean time, expel'd from their serene abodes
By lawless outrage, and the force of arms,
The frighted Tribes assembled to their Prince,
Plaintive of wrongs, and sadden'd with distress.
The Victor squadrons, zealous to subdue
An harmless Nation, and, by cruel deeds,
Destroy it from the earth, at once let loose
The rage of Av'rice, Lust, and Vengeance join'd:
Slaughter was first, and, when the sword was tir'd
With tragick fury, lawless Lust took place,
And from the Husband's arms, the injur'd Bride
Was sternly forc'd away; the hoary Sire
Deplor'd the virgin honour of his house
Defil'd, and o'er his ravish'd Daughters mourn'd;
The temples of their Gods, full-fraught with wealth
Immense, became their prey:  no more appear'd
The shining ornaments, and wond'rous gifts
Which grateful nations had bequeath'd to Heav'n,
But, stript of all, the rev'rend structures sunk
In mighty ruins, and the wild beast roam'd,
With nightly roarings, round the desart pile.
No place was free from Misery and Death,
No age, nor sex was spar'd; a gen'ral groan
Ascended to the skies, and endless scenes
Of Desolation sadden'd all the land.

So where the Dam (uprais'd, with mighty toil,
And vast expence, to bound the wild sea's rage)
Gives way before the long continu'd storm,
And ever beating surge in at the Sluce,
With headlong fury, pour resistless down
The exulting billows, and, with dreadful roar
Wide-thund'ring, deluge all the plain; one rude
Influx of boiling waters raves along,
And dire destruction rides on ev'ry wave.

Struck to the soul, with an excess of grief,
Afflicted Zeuma mourn'd his country's woes
Incessantly renew'd; the golden day,
And cheerful light of heav'n could ne'er afford
A pause of comfort, nor the night's still shades
A moment of serene repose:  But Death
And Horror, in tremendous shapes, disturb'd
His dreams; or ghastly Shades, of slaughter'd troops,
Intreated for Revenge, and, groaning loud,
Broke short his slumbers, and renew'd his pains.
Nor was it Grief alone, but kingly Care,
And anxious Study, to redeem his realm
From Violence, and War, employ'd his hours:
Pensive he sate, revolving the success
Of future battles, and approaching toils;
No thought of  Pleasure could relax his zeal
For publick Good, no dread of pain affright
Him from his Charge; but, like a Mountain, fixt
By heav'n to guard the sea-beat shore, unmov'd
With winds or waves, he bore the rude assaults
Of adverse Fate with an unconquer'd soul,
Nor bent beneath the Load.  While thus he mourn'd,
And labour'd thus to give his kingdom Peace,
Young Ogdar brave and good, by Zeuma lov'd
With growing friendship from his tender years,
Return'd from unsuccessful Leagues with sad
And drooping heart; and, as the eager prince
Demanded the result, with downcast look
And streaming eyes began:  O my dear lord,
The good old king Olymnah has comply'd
With all our wants, and sent me from his court
Laden with all the happiness our fate
Could give, but all in vain:  bad Fortune still
Attends us, and w' are plung'd in ruin now,
Yet deeper than before. &mdash; Soon as the King
Had heard the Story of our woes, he gave
Immediate orders to assemble all
His martial Chiefs, and with a ready heart
Drew out his Soldiers to the field; then thus
Dismiss'd me to the War:  "My valiant friend,
Behold what succour's in our pow'r to give
Your noble Lord; 'tis all our scanty rule
Can raise in his Defence, not half so much
As he deserves:  But 'tis my trust that Heav'n
Will be his guard, and prosper the event
Of such a righteous Cause. &mdash; Instead of my
Enfeebled arm to combat by his side,
I send Zirene to relieve his cares,
And smooth the toil of empire with her smiles:
Long e'er this day I 'ad imag'd to my soul
The prospect of a thousand joys in his
Possession of her peerless charms, and all
Th' unnumber'd blessings of a virtuous race;
But ah!  how fond, how fruitless was the hope!
&mdash;Yet Ogdar, hear me, 'tis a father speaks,
I'll give her to thy charge; convoy'd by thee,
The nuptial band shall still unite our loves,
And make ev'n old Olymnah happy, e'er
He sink into the grave, and be no more:
Then take this dearest offspring of my bed,
And lead her to his arms; his doating heart
Has long been hers, and she has long indulg'd
His growing ardour with an equal flame:
O may she bring good Fortune, Health, and Joy
To his Embrace, and crown his future days
With Happiness, and Peace." &mdash; This said,
He kiss'd the blushing Maid, and, sighing, gave
Her to my care for you. &mdash; O that my Care,
My Life, or Death could have secur'd her charms,
And made the present yours &mdash; A general shout
Ensu'd, and all seem'd raptur'd that their King
Had chose so great a hero for his son:
But all were not, the proud Otomac lov'd
The blooming fair, and, with his friends, retir'd
In discontent to meditate revenge,
And feed the burning fury of his soul.

Mean time, equip'd in all the pomp of war,
We march'd away, and, with increasing hopes
Of Victory, and Peace, at last arriv'd
Upon the verge of this unhappy land:
When, early as the dawn, these dreadful sons
Of Violence, and War, engag'd our host
With all the thunder of the Gods; let loose
Unseen destruction thro' our drowzy camp,
And cover'd all the field with blood:  in vain
We fought, or fled; the valiant fell in heaps,
Who dar'd oppose their rage, and, in pursuit,
The fiercest creatures of the world o'erturn'd
Our flying squadrons, scatter'd, and confus'd.
&mdash;The battle lost, I paus'd awhile to save
Zirene from her fate, and instant ran
To her relief:  but ah!  my care arriv'd
Too late; for curs'd Otomac, who had led
These barb'rous strangers to revenge his loss,
Was there, and, with unmanly force, had siez'd
Her in his arms, and, from the bloody scene,
Prepar'd to hurry her away.  Pale fear
Had froze her blood, and stifled her complaints,
Her livid cheek has lost it's crimson dye,
Her eyes their wonted rays; excessive Grief,
And mute Despair sat pensive on her brow,
And sadden'd ev'ry glance.  Struck to the soul,
With sudden horror, at the sight, I flew
To vengeance with an eager hand, and stain'd
My jav'lin his Blood:  at once he fell,
And in redoubled curses murmur'd out
His soul.  But fruitless was the stroke; for lo!
Ev'n then the Christian chief with all his strength
Beset us round, and hinder'd our escape:
So nought remain'd, but to resign our arms,
And trust the conqu'ror with our lives; nor was
The trust in vain, for your Zirene's charms,
With a resistless force, soften'd his rage,
And sooth'd him into smiles:  with gentle mein
He rais'd her from the ground, where drown'd in tears
She lay, and seem'd to pity her distress;
Then gaz'd again, 'till young desire inflam'd
His soul, and made the Victor own a Pow'r
Superior to his own.  That fatal day
Began his passion, and each fleeting hour
Increas'd it's rage; at last he talk'd of love,
And pleaded all the ardour of his flame;
Invok'd the nuptial rites, and press'd the Fair
To listen to his vows:  but she, averse,
With stern disdain, refus'd his warm address,
And sigh'd, and mourn'd for you.  Thus still she lives,
And, with unceasing Tears, bewails her doom.
Then rouze your courage, O my dearest lord!
And justify your Love, by warm and arms:
A thousand Dangers I've already run
T' acquaint you with her Fate; a thousand more
I'll dare with you to set such virtue free,
And prove our Valour equal to our cause.

