What hollow sound thus breaks thy silence, Night!
'Tis Tempest, rising with tremendous pow'r,
His gloomy terrors doth the world affright;
And Ruin rules the awful midnight hour:
The passing clouds their wat'ry stores distil,
Whilst Ocean rages in the dreadful blast
That drives the ship, and mocks the seamen's skill,
Who cling, despairing, to the shatter'd mast.
Alas!  I hear the wretches call, in vain,
For aid &mdash; they sink, o'erwhelm'd by the relentless main.

Now, Morning comes to usher in the Year,
Whilst over Europe howls the boding storm;
Around our Isle demolish'd ships appear,
And mangled corses our sad shores deform.
Now Rumour elevates her trembling voice,
And bids us arm against invading foes;
No more our simple villagers rejoice
In peace &mdash; they shudder at approaching woes.
With ev'ry hour, new hopes and fears arise,
Whilst Rumour, thro' the Isle, on wings of terror flies.

The Hag of Despotism now remov'd,
No more the northern nations shall despoil;
Celestial Freedom, by their hearts approv'd,
Will deck with richer scenes their stubborn soil:
Truth, Science, Peace, Philanthropy, and Joy,
Shall dignify the land where Freedom dwells;
Imperious tyrants shall no more annoy
Mankind, but sink to where Oppression yells;
In burning chains of adamant confin'd,
The wretched miscreants live, who have oppress'd mankind.

The voice of War is heard thro' Europe's bounds,
And, active to destroy, the armies throng;
The Ocean echoes the fell cannon's sounds,
Where hostile fleets the deathful fight prolong:
Rapacious privateers on Commerce prey,
As the fierce lion takes the tim'rous deer;
And wealth and plenty in the towns decay&mdash;
No hopes of Peace the warring nations chear.
So the new year begins: &mdash; O!  may it end
In mild Serenity, and Peace the world befriend.

When will the time arrive, that Man no more
Shall with his fellow Man on earth content?
But, join'd in love, our gracious GOD adore,
The Sire of Spirits &mdash; our immortal Friend.
Haply this year may bring the promis'd rest,
From war, and crimes, and ev'ry human ill;
And with the aid of true Religion blest,
Virtue shall her delightful laws instil.
May Providence this era realize,
And all the human race ennobling FREEDOM prize.
