New Inspiration, Heav'nly Muse, afford,
That I in grateful Numbers may record;
May from Oblivion's Shade the Chiefs retrieve,
And make their Names to coming Ages live;
Who left the Pleasures of Britannia's Isle,
The soft Endearments of their native Soil,
For War's Alarms, and honourable Toil.
Who in reform'd Religion's Glorious Cause,
Fought on the Belgian Plains, with Earth's and Heav'n's Applause.

Valiant Horatio, to the Britons dear,
The mighty Brother of the mighty Vere,
Held in Eliza's Army high Command;
He rais'd in Essex Fields his War-like Band.
A Hero to his Brother next admir'd,
Whose Noble Veins true British Courage fir'd:
The other Captains were exceeded far
By the Great Veres, two Thunder-bolts of War.

Alban, th' Illustrious Gen'ral's only Son,
Whose Vertues universal Love had won,
A beauteous Youth, worthy a milder Doom,
A Hero promis'd, and a Vere to come,
Left his fair Sisters to their Mother's Care,
And for the Field did his bright Arms prepare,
From his great Sire, to learn the Art of War.

Brave Troops advanc'd from fair Wiltonia's Plains,
And aeiry Downs, on which unnumber'd Swains,
With cheerful Toil, their fertile Acres Till,
And with harmonious Lays the Vally fill.
Where, for their woolly Riches, every Year
Ten Thousand Sheep the wealthy Farmers shear.
Whose Spoils are truly Albion's Golden Fleece,
Outvying that of Legendary Greece.
These sent abroad from Britain's noble Loom,
Bring forreign Wealth, and distant Pleasures home.
Silks, Pearl, and Spices, from the wanton East,
Rich Drugs, with Gold and Silver, from the West.
Cecil in Arms, and War-like Conduct great,
Son to the famous Counsellor of State,
Enroll'd these valiant Troops, and pass'd them o'er
From the Britannick, to the Belgick Shore.
They did a strange Alacrity express,
To aid reform'd Batavia in Distress.

Augusta's Youth, Divine Religion's Cause,
From the bright Court and busy City draws.
The Merchants to their gainful Burse prefer
The Tented Field, to learn from mighty Vere
To settle War-like Factories abroad,
Who may their Fleets with glorious Laurels load:
May fix a Commerce of a nobler sort,
Send Trophies home, and martial Fame import.
These ardent Squadrons were by Sidney led,
(Who has not Sidney's Praises heard or read?)
Whose Pen and Sword both Laurels did acquire,
Whom Camps and Courts did equally admire.
None more did famous Men of Letters court,
None their Polite Republick more support.
He, their Protector, cherish'd every Bard,
And all their Flights profusely did reward.
The tuneful Tribe his Triumphs did adorn,
And at his Altars all their Incense burn.
None in the Poets Songs more brightly shone,
Immortal by their Pens, Immortal by his own.
All to his Standard Veneration paid,
Brought to his Mint their Works to be essay'd.
No Poet's then were reckon'd Sterling Lays,
Which bore no Stamp or Mark of Sidney's Praise.
Ye Bards, this noble Patron would you know?
Sidney was then, what Montague is now.

The valiant Greville, an Illustrious Name,
From whom a noble Race of Patriots came,
Whose Merit Sidney with true Friendship crown'd;
As well for Letters, as for Arms renown'd,
Inspir'd with Zeal, his Weapons did demand,
To follow Sidney to the Belgick Land.
In Arms th' Iberian's Progress to arrest,
Repel the Tyrant, and relieve th' Opprest.
He, Warwick's Hero, from his Castle went,
And pitch'd on Dunmore Plain his War-like Tent:
Muster'd upon the Legendary Ground
His Tenants, and his Country-men around:
Then march'd to pierce the threefold Roman Beast,
The Monster, and unsufferable Pest,
That worse, than ancient Plagues, Europa did infest.

Valiant Mordano, of a high Descent,
To free his Neighbours from Oppression, went.
The Brave Young Man by all Men was admir'd,
With the true Courage of his Nation fir'd.
He for the dusty Field forsook his Farms,
Ignoble Pleasures, for Heroick Arms:
To all thy Beauties, Albion, did prefer
More glorious Danger, and more charming War.
Part of the Guards did great Eliza send,
Who on her Royal Person did attend
These Young Mordano, their intrepid Head,
In Belgian Fields to Martial Hazard led.

Norris, a Chief, not of Plebeian Birth,
Of envy'd Honour, and uncommon Worth,
To the Great Man of the same Name ally'd,
Belgia's Defender, and Britannia's Pride;
Whose glorious Deeds fatigu'd the Wings of Fame,
And high as Heav'n advanc'd the Hero's Name;
Brought the bold Youth from all the Towns that stood
On the rich Banks of Isis' famous Flood:
From fair Oxonia, whose high Turrets rise,
Yet to her Fame unequal, 'midst the Skies:
The Source of Science, which does every way
Polifick Streams thro' Albion's Isle convey:
And greater Riches on the Mind bestows,
Than Isis gives the Land, thro' which it flows.

Lomel, a Gen'ral of a noble Line,
Whose Deeds in Story will for ever shine.
Sedate and Valiant, Courteous and Polite
In Britain's Court, but bravely rough in Fight;
Rais'd his bold Troops, one part in Sussex Soil,
One in the Nothern Region of the Isle:
Who could unhurt hard Martial Labour bear,
And suffer all Inclemencies of Air.
These could with Parents, Friends, and Country part,
Freedom and pure Religion to assert.

Gouramno, long to Camps and Arms innur'd,
Whose mighty Deeds had deathless Fame procur'd;
His valiant Troops on Cam's fam'd Current bred,
From Albion's Shore, to forreign Triumphs led.
Hamel, a Noble Caledonian Knight,
Proud to defend Religion, Law, and Right,
Led his Battallions from th' Orccadian Isles,
To merit Fame, and share Iberian Spoils.
Ingol and Palma, Chiefs of mighty Name,
In Belgick Plains encreas'd their Martial Fame;
With Fairfax, Ruta, Conway, Lovelace, Ball,
Gale, Silvius, Parker, Ogle, Herbert, all
Ready at Honour's, and at Danger's Call.

Mauritius, of a Noble House, that shines
With mighty Worthies, Heros, Heroines,
Great Patriots, Conqu'rors of a God-like Race,
Who in long Order Belgia's Annals grace;
Batavia's Founder of Immortal Fame,
And, Albion, hence thy Great Deliverer came:
A Prince, of whom the Belgians justly boast,
As Chief, commanded Belgia's Valiant Host.
Brave Fredrick, in the early Bloom of Youth,
Reform'd Religion and Coelestial Truth,
Freedom and Right, in Battel to defend,
Did his Great Brother to the Field attend.

The famous Hollock, in Germania bred,
Next to Mauritius, did the Belgians Head.
Ernest and Loick took with great Applause
The Field, in Belgia's and Religion's Cause.
In both their Veins, to their great Honour, flow'd
Illustrious Streams of high Nassovian Blood.
One Gen'ral was of Foot, and one of Horse,
Each prais'd for Courage, Vigilance, and Force.
Horno and Goren, both of Geldria's Land,
Bevert and Solms had Posts of high Command.

Brave Maximilian pass'd the rapid Rhine,
And with his Squadron did Mauritius join.
A Pious Zeal did this Great Prince perswade,
To bring th' oppress'd reform'd Batavians Aid.
This Leader Valiant, Beautiful, and Young,
Adorn'd with every Princely Vertue, sprung
From the Illustrious Hannoverian House,
Which did with Zeal reform'd Belief espouse:
Did still against encroaching Pow'rs contend,
Curb proud Oppressors, and the Oppress'd defend:
The House on which Britannia casts her Eye,
Hoping for vacant Thrones a long Supply.
She happy in a new Eliza's Reign,
Wishes, but Oh!  her Wishes are in vain,
That her Victorious Monarch's Human Frame,
Was as Immortal, as her Deathless Fame.
But since she must (ah, fatal must!) encrease
The Glorious Dead, Oh!  may it be in Peace.
May the afflictive Blow be long deferr'd,
Let it be late e'er the sad Cry be heard;
Oh!  may Britannia long, may Europe long be spar'd!
And when we feel th' inevitable Stroke,
Oh!  let not Britain bear the Gallick Yoke.
Let not the Sons of Belial's curs'd Design
Succeed to break the Royal, Legal Line:
Men of a cruel persecuting Kind,
Averse to Goodness, and to Reason blind:
Who our late Chains and Bondage would restore,
Rome's Superstition, and proud Gallia's Pow'r:
Who Slav'ry court, pull their own Altars down,
To raise a Roman Bigot to the Throne.
Monsters beyond what ever Aegypt saw,
Beyond what ever err'd from Nature's Law;
They would no Pains, no Crimes, no Danger shun,
To see their Country ruin'd, and undone.
But let the Heros of the Legal Line
On Britain's Throne with envy'd Honour shine.
And from the Noble undecaying Root,
For ever may Illustrious Branches shoot,
Britannia to adorn with Royal Fruit.
May they, with tender Care Religion guard,
Suppress the Wicked, and the Good reward.
May they like William, and like Anna Reign,
Curb Roman Pride, and Tyranny restrain.
This valiant Youth a Band of Germans brought,
Who for reform'd Religion bravely fought,
And from the noblest Cause, the noblest Laurels sought.

Soon as the Morn, to let in dawning Light,
Drew up the Sable Curtain of the Night:
Great Vere arose, and negligent of Rest,
His vig'rous Limbs in burnish'd Armour drest:
A Crimson Scarf, with Golden Fringes grac'd,
Eliza's Gift, adorn'd his comely Wast.
His flaming Sword to Death a faithful Friend,
On whom familiar Vict'ry did attend,
Whose fatal Force unnumber'd Warriors felt,
Hung by his Side in a rich Silver Belt.
Hard polish'd Steel his Back and Breast encas'd,
And his bright Helmet round his Head was brac'd;
Whose Repercussions of the glancing Light,
Improv'd the Sun, which thus grown doubly bright,
By keen Reflection dazled more the Sight.
This grasp'd his glitt'ring Lance, the other Hand,
With Martial Grace, his Staff of high Command.
Such Flame, such Ardor sparkled in his Eyes,
As from a perfect inbred Courage rise.
And which are never seen, but where we find
True Vertue mixt with Nobleness of Mind.

As Caesar look'd when on Pharsalian Plains,
Heroick Heat distending all his Veins;
He march'd to Battel, where the Lot was hurl'd,
Which must decide the Empire of the World:
Such as Illustrious Michael did appear,
When griping fast his long Immortal Spear,
The Glorious Warrior at his Army's Head,
The bright Brigades of Heav'n to Combate, led:
Such Looks in Arms did the Great Briton wear,
So Seraph-like his Port, so Caesar-like his Air.

A Mauritanian led his famous Steed,
Prais'd for his wond'rous Beauty, Strength, and Speed.
The true-bred Mare was of Britannia's Isle,
The Noble Sire was brought from Thracia's Soil.
All Men the gen'rous Creature did admire,
Wanton with Life, and bold with native Fire.
With thund'ring Feet he paws the trembling Ground,
He strikes out Fire, and spruns the Sand around.
Does with loud Neighings make the Vally ring,
And with becoming Pride his Foam around him fling.
So light he treads, he leaves no Mark behind,
As if indeed descended from the Wind:
And yet so strong, he does his Rider bear,
As if he felt no Burden, but the Air.
A Cloud of Smoke from his wide Nostrils flies,
And his hot Spirits brighten in his Eyes.
At the shrill Trumpet's Sound he pricks his Ears,
With brave Delight surveys the glitt'ring Spears,
And covetous of War, upbraids the Coward's Fears.

Now did the Hero at his Army's Front,
With Martial Mein his noble Courser mount;
Which bounding and curvetting o'er the Sand,
Did neither wholly go, nor wholly stand.
So easy on his Back the Hero sate,
As if he gave more Life, nor added Weight.
The Pride of Arms advanc'd, and was to view
At once a Pleasure, and a Terror too.
Now the Battallions move at his Command,
And fill the Heav'ns with Clouds of Dust and Sand.
Spears, Helmets, Muskets, with the Sun-beams play,
Their flashing Glances thro' the Field convey,
And bandy to and fro reverberated Day.
When on their March embattled Clouds appear,
What formidable Gloom their Faces wear?
How wide their Front?  how deep and black their Reer?
How do their threat'ning Heads each other throng?
How slow the crowding Legions move along?
The Winds with all their Wings can scarcely bear
Th' oppressive Burden of th' impending War.
So on their March did Vere's Battallions show,
As great their Terror, and their Pomp as slow.

And now the Cannon in the Army's Van,
With their loud Peals the bloody Fight began.
Their roaring Voice rent all the ambient Air,
The Promulgation of advancing War.
Dreadful Salutes pass'd from the Briton's side,
To which th' Iberian terribly reply'd.
The thund'ring Noise, the wide-mouth'd Cannon made,
Did all the Towns and Tow'rs around invade.
Prodigious Fire was made on either part,
The Shepherds Heard, and on the Downs did start.
The Sound augmenting, all the Region fills,
By Repetition from the ecchoing Hills.
The wond'ring Skies with forreign Light'ning shone,
And rung with Peals of Thunder, not their own.
As high Vesuvius, when the Ocean laves
His fiery Roots with Subterranean Waves,
Disturb'd within, does in Convultions roar,
And casts on high his undigested Oar:
Discharges Massy surfeit on the Plains,
And empties all his rich Metalick Veins.
His ruddy Entrails, Cinders, Pitchy Smoke,
And intermingled Flames the Sun-beams choak.
The dreadful Roaring, and the awful Sight,
Shakes all Campania, and her Swains affright.
Such on the Batt'ries did their Guns appear,
As frightful to behold, as horrible to hear.

And now their mutual Cannonading past,
Which did a while with wond'rous Fury last:
Th' impatient Britons, at their Chief's Command,
Began the bold Attack with Sword in Hand.
Mordano, who did Death and Danger face
With Courage worthy of his Noble Race,
Himself the foremost of his bold Brigade,
Dauntless went on, and the first On-set made.
Mindless of Death, brave to Intemperance,
The noble Chief did to the Lines advance.
The Great Young Man was by old Captains prais'd,
Who at his fearless Progress stood amaz'd.
He press'd the high Entrenchments, to assail
Thro' Storms of Fire, and Show'rs of Leaden Hail.
By his resistless Valour, mounted up,
And cut his Passage to the Rampart's Top.
Then with his Fauchion strong Anselmo slew,
And cleft the Valiant Barlamon in two.

Then Noble Garcio, Valiant, Young, and Proud
Of his rich Lands, and pure Castilian Blood,
Who from the Banks of Golden Tagus came,
By brave Atchievements, to advance his Name,
To stop the Briton's Progress, swiftly flew,
And at his Breast a lighted Fire-ball threw.
His Head inclin'd, the British Youth did hear
The erring Ball pass hizzing by his Ear.
Th' enrag'd Castilian curs'd his luckless Chance,
And to a closer Combate did advance.
He rais'd his flaming Fauchion in the Air,
And for a fatal Blow did all his Strength prepare.
But first he cross'd himself, and then he cry'd,
Propitious Saints, who o'er the War preside,
On whose Protection I confide in Fight,
Assist my Arm, and guide this Stroke aright:
Then did his Sword descend with fearful Sway,
And thro' the Briton's Armor made its way.
It cut his Side, and thro' the wounded Veins,
The ebbing Blood his plated Thigh distains.
This did Mordano's Rage so much provoke,
That gath'ring all his Force for one brave Stroke,
He rais'd his reeking Sword with Slaughter Red,
And aim'd his Blow between the Breast and Head:
Which did the Pipe, that Breath conveys, divide,
And cut the Jugulars from side to side:
And had it met the Juncture of the Bone,
The Spaniard's Head had from his Shoulders flown:
He fell, and lay expiring in his Blood,
That gushing from his Veins around him flow'd.

Nor did a milder Fate Ibarra meet,
Who lay extended at the Conq'ror's Feet.
Gonzala next from fair Ibero's Flood,
And Ascoli the Briton's Arms withstood.
Unhappy Youths both by his Fauchion dy'd,
In Blood before, and now in Fate ally'd.
Brave Bourgon took the Field in quest of Fame,
But slain, he fell, to raise Mordano's Name.

Then strong Daranda, to sustain his Troops,
And disappoint the brave Young Briton's Hopes,
Attack'd his Squadrons with a fierce Brigade,
And great Destruction with his Weapons made.
Mordano now fatigu'd, and out of Breath,
By feasting with his Sword Voracious Death,
And feeble with the great Effusion grown,
Both of Iberian Blood, and of his own,
Fainted and sunk; Cecil, who near him fought,
Advanc'd, and in his Arms the Warrior caught.
With tender Care he to the Camp convey'd,
And on his Bed the noble Briton laid.
Cecil did swiftly to the Fight return,
By Valiant Deeds Britannia to adorn.
Eager of War, he mingled with the Crowd,
And deep Revenge for brave Mordano vow'd.
With gallant Rage th' Iberian he invades,
And sought Daranda 'midst the thick Brigades.
The Spaniard saw, and did his Arms oppose,
Whence on the Lines a noble Combate rose.
Of equal Stature, equal Fame, and Age,
The British and th' Iberian Chiefs engage.
Hard on the Briton brave Daranda prest,
And push'd his glitt'ring Pike against his Breast.
The Armour to the Weapon did not yield,
But with the Thrust the stagg'ring Briton reel'd.
But soon recov'ring, with a back-hand Blow
He hop'd to cut the Spaniard's Head in two.
His Head indeed the erring Weapon mist,
But did divide the Sinews of the Wrist.
He dropt his Arms, and by a second Wound
Deep in his Breast he fell, and bit the Ground.
He fetch'd his Breath in Sobs, and double Sighs,
And often strove, but strove in vain to rise:
His Eyes defrauded of their vital Ray,
Labour for Life, and catch the flying Day.
From the wide Wound a purple River flows,
And Life departs in strong convulsive Throws.

Herrera next, and noble Manoel,
One did in Arms, and one in Arts excel,
By valiant Cecil's fatal Weapon fell.
One's Breast he pierc'd with his destructive Spear,
Whose bloody Point did thro' the Back appear.
He, with his Sword the other did invade,
And in the middle cleft the Shoulder-Blade:
Whence his disabled Arm depending swung,
And from the Joint in fearful manner hung.
When Valdes saw what Ruin Cecil made,
In what high Heaps the slain Iberians laid,
He brought his Cohort to the Spaniard's Aid.
The British Chief with Numbers over-born,
Did to his Line with wond'rous Rage return.
Supply'd with Troops, the Combate he renew'd,
On famous Valdes dire Revenge pursu'd,
Whence on the Works a dreadful Fight ensu'd.

Thy trembling Cities, Belgia, heard from far
The Muskets Vollies, and the Shouts of War.
The Soldiers Cries, the Drum's and Trumpet's Voice,
A horrid Medly made of loud discordant Noise.
Dreadful Confusion, complicated Sounds,
And confluent Horrors scare the list'ning Towns.
Ecchoes with Ecchoes Combate in the Skies,
Clamors with Clamors meet, and Cries with Cries.
On rolling Waves of Air, and adverse Tides
Born to and fro Triumphant Uproar rides.
Rencount'ring Sounds th' Aetherial Deep embroil,
From Heav'n to Earth, from Earth to Heav'n recoil.
Unseen Destrustion swiftly thro' the Skies,
In Leaden Tempests back and forwards flies.
Their pond'rous Balls in Vollies they unload,
And Massy Death in Flame and Smoke explode.
On either side thus terribly they fir'd,
Neither advanc'd, and neither Foe retir'd.
On the same Ground inflexible they stood,
Fearless of Death, and obstinate in Blood.
While this Dispute the Warriors did maintain,
Many brave Men on either side were slain.
Among the Britons, Roceter lay dead,
Ah!  much lamented Youth!  the fatal Lead
His yielding Helmet past, and pierc'd his Head.
Gilbert, for Beauty and for Arms, the Pride
Of all the Towns on fair Sabrina's Tide,
Untimely Fate!  here much applauded dy'd.
A fatal Culv'rins Shot!  unusual Death!
Took from the upper, all the Jaw beneath.
The lovely Youth became a ghastly Sight,
And those he charm'd before, does now affright.

Haughton, for finer Conversation nam'd,
For shining Wit, and Erudition fam'd,
Lay, helpless Man!  extended on the Ground,
And pour'd his vital Purple from his Wound.
The deadly Bullet thro' his Forehead past,
An Inch above the Eye-brows, and effac'd
The Haunts and Tracks of Learning in the Brain,
The num'rous Lodgings, which did entertain
All Mem'ry's crowded Guests, and Fancy's aeiry Train.

Dudley was slain, in high Augusta Born,
Whose courtly Breeding did the Town adorn.
Polite of Manners, easy of Access,
Of graceful Mein, and elegant Address.
By every Warrior prais'd, and every Dame,
He made Campaigns and Love with equal Fame.
But Death, that Courts and Breeding does neglect,
Show'd to so fine a Person no Respect.
He a deep Wound in his right Side receiv'd,
Which of his Life, the well-bred Chief bereav'd.

Cary lay hurt, who danc'd with great Applause,
And by his aeiry Feet, to Fame and Honour rose.
So smooth, so strong, so swift he did advance,
That Seraphs so would tread, would Seraphs dance.
He did excel in Genius, Skill, and Rule,
All Gallia's Court, Europa's Dancing-School.
Shot from a Cannon's Mouth an envious Stone
His Ancle struck, to pieces crush'd the Bone.
To stop the Gangreen, that began to climb
Londello's Hand took off the putrid Limb.
To save his Life, the Artist's Skill prevail'd,
But ah!  the Fair their mighty Loss bewail'd.

Harmonious Westan bravely charg'd the Foe,
And did intrepid Resolution show.
The fatal Ball in at his Navel went,
And in the adverse Reins its Fury spent.
He Breathless on the Ground extended lay,
His Lifeless Eyes forsaken by the Day.
Thy Deeds, brave Man!  how should my Praises Crown,
Had I a Voice to sing then, like thy own?

Here too did Clifford's Course of Glory end,
A Man of Honour, and a faithful Friend.
None the Theorbo with a softer Hand,
Few with a stronger did the Sword command.
Whene'er he took the Lute, or grasp'd the Spear,
He touch'd the Heart with Pleasure, or with Fear.
By the same Hand, the Lute, the Lance, the Foe,
Did tremble in their turn, and like Emotion show.
The envious Ball pass'd thro' from Ear to Ear,
And did the tuneful Drums to pieces tear,
Which aeiey Accents beat, to make us hear.
It did the curious Instruments confound,
And all the winding Labarynths of Sound,
The charming Musick-Rooms, that entertain
The Soul high seated in her Throne the Brain.

The greater part of these Assailants slain,
Sidney advanc'd the Living to sustain.
He led his Troops to drive th' Iberian back,
And made with great Applause his fierce Attack.
And now the Fight with Fury was renew'd,
And either side unshaken Courage shew'd.
To charge the Foe the eager Britons flew,
And missive Fires, and Hand Granadoes threw.
They, to oblige th' Iberian to retire,
Sent whistl'ing Show'rs of Lead, and Storms of artful Fire.
Redoubled Vollies rent the ambient Air,
And flying Clouds now faster flew for Fear.
Mean time th' unbroken Spaniard kept his Ground,
Volly for Volly gave, and Wound for Wound.
The Britons thus resisted grew enrag'd,
Flew to the Files, and in close Fight engag'd.
Between the Foes arose a sharp Contest,
While Beard to Beard they stood, and Breast to Breast.
Swords clash'd with Swords uplifted in the Air,
And mingl'ing Flashes form'd a frightful Glare.
Arms rub'd on Arms, Fauchions on Helmets rung,
While hov'ring Vict'ry undetermin'd hung.

Sidney enrag'd that Conquest was delay'd,
Broke thro' their Ranks and horrid Slaughter made.
Cleaving the thick Battallions did advance,
His Sword in one Hand, and in one his Lance.
Splendid in Arms, to bring his Friends Relief
Hernandes hasten'd, but the British Chief,
Full on the Neck of his Illustrious Foe
Discharg'd a furious Horizontal Blow;
The gasping Head leap'd off amidst the Crowd,
Sprinkling their Faces with the scatt'ring Blood.
The Lips still speaking, as they flew, appear'd;
Some thought they low imperfect Accents heard.
The ghastly Trunk lay quiv'ring on the Plain,
Emptying its Vital Tide from every Vein.

Cressier, who came from Arragonian Hills,
Who with his Deeds Iberian Story fills,
With dauntless Courage did oppose his Breast,
To Sidney's Arms, his Progress to arrest.
Th' advancing Briton with a Blow oblique,
Th' Iberian's Face did with great Fury strike.
The Spaniard's Nose receiv'd the Fauchion's Edge,
Which did in sunder cut the rising Bridge.
The Blood that follow'd part distain'd his Breast,
And trickling down his Throat ran inwardly the rest.
Luzon ran in, and took the second Blow,
By which the Briton else had slain the Foe;
And thro' the Squadrons bore him from the Field
For Cure, to Men in Art Chyrurgick skill'd.

Next young Salanzar Sidney's Fauchion felt,
Who on the high Galician Mountains dwelt:
The Sword descended with a transverse Blow,
And split his fore and hinder Head in two:
It cut the wide Cannal along the Brain,
Which here performs the Duty of a Vein:
A spacious Road contriv'd with wond'rous Art,
By which the refluent Blood regains the Heart.
The Warrior fell, and pour'd out on the Plain
A bloody Torrent intermixt with Brain.
But Sidney burning with too fierce a Flame,
Too avaricious of Heroick Fame,
With so much Vigor carry'd on the War,
And midst the thick Brigades advanc'd so far,
That the Battallions of th' insulting Foes,
On every side the Warrior did enclose.
Long did he stand fatigu'd, and out of Breath,
By giving or repelling Wounds and Death.
Bravely the disproportion'd War withstood,
Polluted with his own, and Hostile Blood.
'Till every way with num'rous Squadrons press'd,
The valiant Briton was at length distress'd.
Brave Greville saw, and for his Friend afraid,
Attack'd the crowded Ranks to bring him Aid.
He did a while the doubtful Field retrieve,
Timely Assistance to the Briton give,
And with fresh Warmth the drooping War revive.
Now Vere's Battallions half their Number slain,
And those with Labour spent, who did remain;
Retreated fighting to their former Ground,
With just Applause, tho' not with Conquest crown'd.

Vere, when he saw his valiant Troops return,
Did with a Noble Indignation burn.
In Person he advanc'd with Sword in Hand,
And that his Men should follow, gave Command.
Waving his Fauchion with a Martial Air,
He march'd along, denouncing dreadful War.
When a She Lion, at the Dawn of Day,
Comes to her Den distended with her Prey,
And finds the Huntsman's Hand has stol'n her Whelps away.
The Noble Beast with Rage distracted roars,
Ranges the Woods and o'er the Mountains scowrs;
Angry she casts around her threat'ning Eyes,
And if by Chance the Robber she espies,
To tear the Wretch in pieces, she with Fury flies.
So did Great Vere advance against his Foes,
And to their dreadful Fire his Breast oppose.
Thro' Storms of loud Destruction, Flames and Smoke,
And whistl'ing Deaths th' intrepid Hero broke.
Thro' all the Shapes of Terror on he flew,
Mounted the Rampart, and the first he slew
Was strong Avallos, of a Noble Race,
Whose valiant Deeds Cordubian Annals grace.
When mighty Vere th' Iberian Chief assail'd,
Nothing his famous Bilbo Blade avail'd.
Nothing his Beads, or consecrated Arms,
Vain were his little Idols, vain the Charms
Of his Religious Reliques, and the Store
Of Holy Trinkets, which the Warrior wore.
The Briton's Sword pass'd his bright Armor thro',
And cut the Sinews of his Neck in two:
Broke up th' Arterial Channels that maintain
A Vital Commerce 'twixt the Heart and Brain.
He fainting fell, and as he struck the Ground
His Arms and Armour gave a ringing Sound.

Next Cerdan Vere's Victorious Fauchion felt,
Who on the Plains of Saragossa dwelt.
His Father, who the Soil around did own,
Amass'd vast Wealth for this his only Son.
To keep him safe at home, their Joy and Hope,
And of their Noble House the single Prop,
Close on his Neck his tender Parents hung,
His weeping Sisters round their Brother clung.
With Pray'rs and Tears, and every moving Art,
They strove the Youth from Danger to divert.
But so determin'd Cerdan was for Arms,
So deaf to mournful Love's disswading Charms,
He from his Parents dear Embraces sprung,
His importuning Sisters from him flung,
And took the Field in shining Armor clad;
And this his first and last Campaign he made.

Then did the Hero's fatal Fauchion slay
Suarez and Lucar, who oppos'd his way,
Caronda, Orgas, Illan, Davilla;
Among th' Iberians, Men of great Renown,
For their high Birth, and for their Valour known.
Now did the Spanish Troops begin to ply,
Not able to repel so great an Enemy.
When Britain's Valiant Youth did onward rush,
And Spain's Brigades with so much Vigor push,
That from the Entrenchments they were beaten back,
Unable to sustain the fierce Attack.

To break their Ranks, Vere cut his bloody Way,
And did in heaps th' opposing Squadrons lay.
His Conq'ring Arms, where e'er he pass'd, prevail'd,
And Death with so much Luxury regal'd,
With such Profusion, that no Sword before
Appeas'd her Thirst, or eas'd her Hunger more.
Rivers of Blood, Limbs from their Bodies chopt,
Dismember'd Trunks, Heads from their Shoulders lopt,
With Weapons intermixt, and scatter'd Brains,
Where e'er he went, oppress'd the Belgick Plains.
As when a pointed Flame of Light'ning flies
With mighty Noise exploded from the Skies;
The ruddy Terror with resistless Strokes
Invades the Mountain-Pines, and Forrest-Oaks:
Wide Lanes across the Woods, and ghastly Tracks
Where e'er it goes, the swift Destruction makes.
So mighty Vere's Victorious Fauchion past,
Such Lanes it made, so laid the Squadrons wast.
Where e'er the Conquering Warrior bent his Course,
He left dire Marks of his destructive Force.
The British Squadrons had their Leader lost
Cover'd with Smoke, and hid with rising Dust,
Had not his Fauchion flashing thro' the Cloud,
The Conq'ror's Progress to his Army show'd.
While thus the Briton, by his rapid Course,
Did from their Ground the pale Iberian's Force;
The Pioneers the Trenches level laid,
And for th' advancing Horse a Passage made.

Brave Lomel mounted on a Cole-black Steed,
Whose Fire and Strength confess'd his noble Breed;
His bold Brigades, to pass th' Entrenchment, led,
And shone in burnish'd Armor at their Head.
The Spanish Squadrons drawn in close Array,
Stood in Battallia to oppose his way.
Waving on high his bright destructive Blade,
Intrepid Lomel did the Foe invade;
He wounded with his Spurs his gen'rous Steed,
And plung'd amidst the War with furious Speed.
With his resistless Sword the Squadron cleft,
And all behind amazing Ruin left.
Moro and Castro, both of Noble Blood,
Who Neighbours liv'd on Guadiana's Flood,
Lomel in vain with their joint Force withstood.
One with his Sword th' advancing Gen'ral slew,
One with his Hand he from the Saddle drew,
And headlong on the Ground the Warrior threw.
His Courser's Feet, as Lomel forward prest,
Struck his last Breath from the brave Spaniard's Breast.
Polluted gloriously with Dust and Blood,
He broke the Ranks, and thro' the Battel rode.
Where e'er the mighty Hero forc'd his way,
In mingled Ruin Horse and Horse-men lay.

Illustrious Hara, long for Arms renown'd,
With Rage beheld the Foe with Conquest crown'd:
He spur'd his Courser's Sides, and void of Fear,
Advanc'd to stop the British Chief's Career.
The Gen'rals met, th' Event the Armies wait;
On either's Brow, Rage and Defiance sate.
Th' Iberian wav'd his bright Toledo Blade,
Which flashing Glory thro' the Air convey'd.
The Sword descended on the Briton's Crest,
Whose faithful Steel its Fury did resist.
Then did the Briton for his valiant Foe,
With his whole Strength prepare a mortal Blow.
He wav'd his dreadful Fauchion, but the Sight
The Spaniard's fiery Steed did so affright,
That rais'd upright, he did the Wound receive,
Destin'd of Life the Rider to bereave:
His Neck half sever'd, down the gen'rous Beast
Fell, and his Rider with his Weight opprest.
A Crowd ran in to save him, and with pain
Bore the bruis'd Hero from the bloody Plain.

Hollock mean time did in another part
Wise Conduct show, and noble Fire exert.
He like a Tempest on th' Iberian flew,
Broke their close Ranks, and pass'd like Thunder thro',
Loick and Horno thro' the Battel press'd,
And at the Spaniard's Cost, their Fame encreass'd.
Mauritius to the Fight his Squadrons brought,
And with a true Nassovian Courage fought.
Many brave Spaniards striving to repel
The mighty Belgian, by his Fauchion fell:
Who did a while a noble War maintain,
And loaded with the Dead the dusty Plain.
The Belgian Troops Mauritius at their Head,
Undaunted follow'd, where the Gen'ral led.
Greedy of Danger, and on Fame intent,
They on the yielding Foe their Fury spent.

Now from the Field th' Iberian Army flew,
And on the Ground their scatter'd Weapons threw.
Horses and Riders, Arms and Harness lay,
An ignominious Medly, on the way.
The Britons follow'd, and Victorious Vere
With his light Horse hung close upon the Reer.
Prodigious Numbers fell, while thus pursu'd,
And their entire Destruction had ensu'd,
Had not beneath her Sable Wings, the Night
Conceal'd the vanquish'd from the Victor's Sight.
The Britons came in Triumph back, to rest
Their Martial Limbs with glorious Toil opprest.

Soon as the Virgin Morn had from the East,
In Orient Light, and Heav'nly Roses drest,
The lab'ring Swains, and early Trav'ler blest:
Great Vere arose, and gave due Thanks to Heav'n,
That to his Troops had this great Triumph giv'n.
With a just Sense of Providence, he own'd
Th' Almighty had his Arms with Conquest crown'd.
For past Protection he his God ador'd,
And future Blessings piously implor'd.
This done, his Pious Orders he declar'd,
That his slain Troops should be with Care interr'd.
Who treach'rous Spain's Tyrannick Arms withstood,
For pure Religion dy'd, and publick Good.
He gave Command, that to the lasting Praise
Of the brave Dead, their living Friends should raise
Upon their Graves high heaps of Turf or Stone,
And make their glorious Fate to future Ages known.
He charg'd the Masters of the healing Art,
Whose Drugs to Men in Torment, Ease impart;
To use their utmost Care and Skill to Cure
The wounded Warriors, and the Sick restore.

Now the Illustrious Prince Mauritius sent,
And Vere invited to his noble Tent,
Whither the Gen'ral well attended went;
With decent Joy each other they embrac'd,
And on each other did the Honour cast
Of Arms, or Conduct, in the Battel past.
Much they discours'd of the successful Day,
How they attack'd, and how the Foe gave way.
What Captains signaliz'd their Valour most;
What Troops regain'd the Ground that others lost.
The Chiefs the Valour of their Squadrons rais'd,
The Prince the Briton, Vere the Belgian prais'd.
The Prince brave Sidney highly did commend,
And Vere as much Hollock, the Prince's Friend.

Then did Mauritius with due Honour name
Britannia's Queen, and rais'd to Heav'n her Fame.
He own'd Eliza pure Religion's Prop,
The Spaniard's Terror, and the Belgian's Hope.
Then much demanded of the famous Queen,
Much of her Person, and Majestick Mein;
Much of great Cecil ask'd, the chief Support
And Ornament of Great Eliza's Court.
At last the Prince requested noble Vere,
While busy Servants did the Feast prepare,
To tell what Cares the Queen had under-gone,
From Papal Foes to guard her envy'd Throne.
With how much Patience, and with how much Toil
She planted pure Belief in Albion's Isle:
What Snares she 'scap'd, and thro' what Dangers run;
The British Chief comply'd, and thus begun.

