The Morn with Purple of Coelestial Dye,
Hung the high Chambers of the Eastern Sky.
Pious Eliza, with her usual Care,
Retir'd for sacred Praise, and secret Pray'r.
Rapture Divine did on the Queen descend,
And Heav'nly Infflux did her Breast extend.
Extatick Heat her lab'ring Heart oppress'd,
And struggling Joy the Pow'r within confess'd.
While with her God the Royal Virgin strove,
In pious Pangs of ardent Zeal and Love;
Too full of Heav'n, and with excessive Day
O'er-whelm'd, the Queen in blissful Transports lay.
While thus entranc'd, she lifting up her Eyes,
Saw Gabriel's Form descending thro' the Skies.
A shining Cloud of bright compacted Air
The Chariot form'd, which did the Seraph bear.
Charms inexpressible, Coelestial Grace,
And perfect Joy smil'd in his youthful Face.

Advancing, he Eliza thus address'd:
Hail Queen, with Heav'n's peculiar Favour bless'd.
Th' Eternal Mind regards your pious Care,
Approves your Service, and accepts your Pray'r.
To show how much your Zeal and Heav'nly Love,
And pure Devotion are esteem'd above,
I by supream Commission thence descend,
You to those happy Regions to attend.
That you may see the Triumphs of the Blest,
Of future Joys, a present Earnest Taste.
Fear not, in Safety this Coelestial Car
Shall thro' th' Aetherial Void Eliza bear.
Take in your Hand this Tuft of fragrant Flowers
From the bless'd Gardens, and Immortal Bow'rs.
These powerful Odors will your Strength support,
While you on high ascend to reach th' Eternal's Court.
I'll thro' the vast Expansion with you ride,
Verss'd in the Road, I'll be your faithful Guide.

He said, and with a mild Seraphick Mein,
In the bright Chariot plac'd Britannia's Queen.
On high they mounted swifter than the Wind,
And left withdrawing Earth, and subject Clouds behind.
They pass'd th' inferior District of the Moon,
And the wide Vortex govern'd by the Sun.
They thro' the vast extended Empires soar
Rul'd by Erratick Stars, Magnetick Pow'r:
Thro' liquid Realms, and solitary Wilds,
Blue Plains of Aether, and transparent Fields.
From Sphere to Sphere, from World to World they pass'd,
And view'd the glorious Lights in wond'rous Order plac'd.
They reach'd the starry Sky, and milky Way,
Regions of Peace, and unmollested Day.
Where casting round her Eyes th' admiring Queen
A thousand Worlds beheld before unseen.
Each little Star, that twinckles in the Skies,
Scarcely discern'd by Astronomick Eyes,
Is now a glorious World, whose central Sway
Planets of various Magnitudes obey.
Their Orbs are all attended, like the Sun's,
With great Variety of changing Moons.
The Stars, which one confed'rate Light display,
With glim'ring Glory mark the Heav'nly Way,
Are sep'rate Empires to th' admiring Queen,
With Fields immense of Aether spread between.
She sees how all the Orbs direct their Course,
And how the Less obeys the Greater's Force.

The Queen sustain'd by the great Seraph, past
These various Worlds and Wonders, till at last
On the high Convex of the outmost Sphere,
She saw the new Jerusalem appear.
Th' Imperial City, where the Christian's God
Has his high Throne, his Saints their bless'd Abode.
Ten thousand Beauties charm'd her ravish'd Sight,
Glory Divine, and Beatifick Light.
She did with Joy ineffable behold
The Adamantine Gates, and Tow'rs of Heav'nly Gold;
The Crystal Walls, th' Immortal Palaces,
Dwellings of Pleasure, Seats of Love and Peace.
Eternal Green, and Flow'rs unfading crown'd
The fair Aetherial Fields, which lay around.
Empyreal Roses, Amaranth Divine,
And sacred Lillies did their Beauties join.
Here happy Groves of fragrant Myrtle stood,
Sweet Bow'rs of Jes'mine there, there a bless'd Cedar Wood.
Whence Odors inexpressible proceed,
Which cheer the Heart, and Life eternal feed.
Rivers of Living Waters bless'd the Sight,
And Streams of unconceivable Delight;
On whose sweet Banks dwells everlasting Spring,
And beauteous Trees, which Fruit Immortal bring.

Passing, she saw in what extatick Joy,
Coelestial Guests their happy Hours employ.
In Transports some with undecaying Flow'rs,
And Heav'nly Garlands crown'd in blissful Bow'rs,
Or spread beneath the Tree of Life, that stood
Upon the Living Water's peaceful Flood,
Did with Angelick Food their Palates feast,
And tasted Pleasures not to be exprest.
They drank rich Nectar, and reviving Wine,
Press'd from the gen'rous Fruits of Growth Divine.
Some on the Fields spread in Triumphant Bands,
With Eyes uplifted, and extended Hands,
Sing Hallelujahs, and Coelestial Lays,
And fill the list'ning Heav'ns with great Jehovah's Praise.
Immerss'd in Bliss ineffable they lie,
O'er-pow'r'd with Joy, and lost in Exstacy.
Some with their bended Knees the Aether press,
And to th' Almighty's Throne their Pray'r address,
Which awful stood amidst Empyreal Sky
On Pillars rais'd insuperably high.
How long they cry'd, God, Holy, Just, and True,
Wilt thou defer thy threat'ned Vengeance due
To proud Oppressors, who thy Martyrs kill,
The World with Blood, and cruel Ruin fill,
Yet boast they serve thee, and obey thy Will.

Some in the happy Walks their Hours employ,
With Heav'nly Converse feeding mutual Joy.
They Suff'rings past with present Bliss compar'd,
And their small Service with its vast Reward.
The Shortness of the Race, which here they run.
With the bless'd Prize of endless Glory won.
They cry, we now our past Impatience blame,
We should, if Heav'n would bear it, blush for Shame,
Our former light Affliction to compare,
With the vast Weight of Glory which we bear.
To the bright Crowns, which now our Heads adorn,
What are the trifling Suff'rings we have born?
All-gracious God!  how are we over-paid
For the Advances we in Vertue made?
How far does thy Reward superior prove,
To the short Labour of our pious Love?
Love, which was Labour, now becomes our Crown,
For Love Divine is Bliss, when fully grown.
Our Work and Wages differ not in Kind,
Vertue is Heav'n, when 'tis from Guilt refin'd.
Mixtures of Crime did once our Peace destroy,
But perfect Purity, is perfect Joy.
How from our Hearts we Pity, oft they said,
Mankind below by flatt'ring Vice betray'd.
Ah foolish Men!  who for Terrestrial Toys,
Enchange this Heav'n, these everlasting Joys.
Who for a Moment's guilty Pleasure, lose
Eternal Peace, and Pain Eternal chuse.

Not far remote, upon a spacious Field,
By his superior Port, and brighter Shield,
Distinguish'd Michael drew in long Array,
Heav'n's bright Brigades, that his Command obey.
Th' Illustrious Cohorts with Seraphick Grace,
In long Review before their Gen'ral pass.
Immortal Youth in their bless'd Faces smil'd,
How terrible their Strength?  their Looks how mild?
What fatal Arms each Glorious Warrior wears?
How keen their Swords?  how long and bright their Spears?
How awful did th' extended Front appear?
How dreadful was their Deep unmeasurable Reer?
The Bless'd were thus employ'd, these Scenes were seen
Before the City, by the wond'ring Queen.

The everlasting Gates lift up their Heads,
Thro' which the Seraph Guide Eliza leads.
He shews her all the Wonders of the Place,
Bright with the Glory of th' Almighty's Face.
He leads the Stranger to th' August Abode,
And the high Throne of the Redeemer God.
She heard, and with extatick Joy beheld
Myst'ries Divine, Things not to be reveal'd.

Then spoke the Guide:  Eliza, pious Queen,
Since pure Religion's Cause has ever been
Your chief Concern, your Joy, your tender Care,
I by supream Commission will declare,
When Heav'n is pleas'd Eliza to remove,
From Albion's Throne to these bless'd Seats above;
What shall befal reform'd Divine Belief,
Whence it shall suffer, whence receive Relief.
The three great Kings, who next shall fill the Throne,
Shall Faith reform'd and pure Religion own.
Shall Heav'n's Dominion o'er the Isle extend,
Invaders curb, and Albion's Church defend.
Rome shall attempt, but shall attempt in vain
Her Empire o'er Britannia to regain:
Employ a thousand Arts with fruitless Toil,
To sink th' establish'd Worship of the Isle.
The fourth (unhappy Prince!) who mounts the Throne,
Shall be, imperious Rome, thy zealous Son.
Then shall reform'd Religion droop her Head,
And impious Rome's impending Tempest dread.
Distress'd Britannia will with Sighs and Tears
Implore th' Almighty to avert her Fears.
She will his Pity, and his Pow'r invoke,
To save her Sons from Rome's oppressive Yoke.
To Guard her Realm, her Altars to secure
From Anti-christian, and Tyrannick Pow'r.
Th' Eternal will their Pray'r in Mercy hear,
Will raise a Just, and great Deliverer,
Who will her Faith defend, and dissipate her Fear.
A mighty Hero of Nassovian Blood,
A Lover of Mankind, and publick Good,
At Heav'n's Command will from Batavia come,
To guard Britannia from insulting Rome.
Belgia will then her Gratitude express,
And in her Turn save Britain in Distress.
Your Kindness to her, States and pious Aid,
By this great Monarch's Arms shall be repaid.
This glorious Prince shall Faith reform'd support
Against the Rage of Rome, and Gallia's haughty Court.

Now a great Warrior sprung from Bedford's Line,
Midst Albion's Heros will conspicuous shine.
He in this Martial King's auspicious Reign,
With his victorious Navy will maintain
Britannia's ancient Empire of the Main.
The Gaul's proud Fleet he'll drive from Albion's Isle,
And spread the Gallick Shores with Gallick Spoil.
He to their Coasts in Thunder will advance,
Rebuke the Pride, and curb the Pow'r of France.
His Arms a French Invasion shall defeat,
As yours compell'd the Spaniard to retreat.

William will Britain's ravish'd Rights restore,
She shall his Goodness feel, her Foes his Pow'r.
For Kings and Queens he will the way prepare,
Destin'd to make the Church and State their Care.
Their Thanks the grateful Britons shall express,
And for their Anna, shall their William bless.
When he shall lay the Royal Scepter down,
And change Britannia's for an Heav'nly Crown,
A new Eliza by th' Almighty's Grace,
Shall fill, great Nassau!  thy Imperial Place.
William in Anna shall himself survive,
While Anna reigns, his Vertues are alive.
She'll William's Aims pursue with great Renown,
She will no Int'rest, but Britannia's own.
She Roman Foes, she Gallick will defeat;
What William left unfinish'd, she'll compleat.
Britons will reap such Blessings from her Reign,
Of their Deliverer's Loss they'll scarce complain.

In her Illustrious Court there will appear
A Wiser Cecil, and a Greater Vere.
One verss'd in Human Nature, Wise, Sedate,
Shall steer with steady Hand the fluctuating State.
Shall by his Skill, and masterly Address
Faction compose, and Bigottry suppress.
Shall angry Mens intemp'rate Heats controul,
And make contending Parties serve the Whole.
One great in Arms by Anna's high Command,
Shall lead her Cohorts to Germania's Land.
Shall Faith reform'd, and Liberty defend,
And Anna's Terrors far and wide extend.
At Schellemburg what Laurels will he gain?
And what Immortal Fame at Bleinheim's glorious Plain?
He'll die with Hostile Blood the Danube's Tide,
And with his Waves o'er-whelm the Gallick Pharo's Pride.
He'll from his Fetters free the grateful Rhine,
And to her Banks repel ambitious Sein.
The rescu'd Princes, who shall then command
The num'rous Nations of Germania's Land,
All from the Soil, where fam'd Danubius flows,
To Alba's Banks, and Scandinavian Snows,
All who shall fear destructive War's Alarms,
Or feel the dire Effect of Gallick Arms,
Shall this Restorer of Europa bless,
And thank his Arms for Liberty and Peace.
Yet unelated will the Conqu'ror come
Laden with Spoils, and far-fetch'd Laurels home.
Unalter'd by Success, he'll free appear
From Pride in Triumph, as in Fight from Fear.
He'll hear unchang'd th' Applauses of the Throng,
The Thanks of Princes, and the Poet's Song.
His unexampled Moderation's Charms
Will crown him more, than his Victorious Arms.
This will the Hero's Character compleat,
And as successful, show him truly Great.

Anna, the Prop of pure Religion's Cause,
Anna, th' Assertor of Britannia's Laws,
Kind to her Subjects, faithful to her God,
Will Mercy show at home, and Pow'r abroad.
What Spain is now, the World shall Gallia see,
And Anna, what Eliza is, shall be.
Another Philip shall o'er Gallia reign,
With whom compar'd this perjur'd King of Spain,
Is Faithful, Kind, Beneficent, and Good,
Free from Ambition, and from Thirst of Blood,
Conquest will ne'er his Lust of Pow'r asswage,
Nor Seas of Blood his persecuting Rage.
At Universal Empire he shall aim,
Pow'r is the Title, that asserts his Claim.
Truth, Honour, Justice, shall no Vertues be,
When they with Gallia's Int'rest disagree.
Such Breach of Faith and Vows are yet unknown,
As this perfidious Prince will with Derision own.
To be ador'd, by Sycophants he'll sit,
Honours Divine and Blasphemy admit.
Regal'd with Ruin, and on Blood intent,
He'll Strangers Plague, and his own Slaves torment.
But Anna's Arms shall his proud Course restrain,
As now Eliza's curb the Pow'r of Spain.

But e'er that Queen th' Imperial Crown shall wear,
She shall a Son, another William, bear;
Whose Princely Vertues by a Noble Bloom,
Promise a great Deliverer to come.
The opening Bud the Hero shall disclose,
Riper than e'er an Age so tender shows.
His wond'rous Genius soon will be display'd;
How few for Rule and Empire so are made?
Fit for the Scepter, or the Sword to weild;
To guide the State, or conquer in the Field.
His Royal Parents Joy and only Prop,
Proud Gallia's Envy, and Britannia's Hope.
High Expectations will possess the Isle,
Fair Liberty will sing, and pure Religion smile.
All will believe, this wond'rous Child by Heav'n
For mighty Deeds and high Events is giv'n.
That he'll Religion, Law, and Right maintain,
Like William combate, like Eliza reign.
But O, ye Britons, you'll your selves destroy
Your present Blessing, and your future Joy.
Your crying Provocations you'll repeat,
Till by your Guilt you your own Hopes defeat.
Your fierce Divisions, mutual Hate and Strife,
Corrupted Manners, and flagitious Life,
Shall God's fierce Wrath and Jealousy provoke,
Till he afflicts you with the fatal Stroke.
Till he the Apple of your Eye remove,
And take your Darling Prince to Bliss above.

The Child will in a burning Fever lie,
But by your more malignant Guilt will die.
Some the Disease, Physicians some accuse,
For what their own destructive Crimes produce.
Tis Albion's Sin, that with Infernal Fire
Kindles the Flame, by which her Hopes expire.
How will the Britons their sad Fate lament?
Oh!  may they of the Cause as much repent!
How will they groan beneath the heavy Cross?
And how bewail th' irreparable Loss?
How will they wring their Hands, and tear their Hair?
How with the Accents of extream Despair,
From Windsor's Tow'rs distract the ecchoing Air?
What Efforts of inimitable Grief,
What Crys of Suff'rers hopeless of Relief,
What wild Distress, and lamentable Strains
Will propagate the Sorrow thro' the Plains?
From Town to Town the catching Grief shall go,
O'er all the Isle shall spread contagious Woe.
Thus shall afflicted Britons mourn their Fate,
But, as their manner is, when 'tis too late.
Unhappy Albion, thankless and unwise,
Before 'tis gone, wilt thou no Blessing prize?
While this sad Story Gabriel did relate,
Eliza pity'd Albion's future Fate.

Then from th' Almighty's bless'd Imperial Seat,
With Britain's Queen, the Seraph did retreat.
They many rolling Worlds and Empires past,
Which glorious hung thro' all th' Aetherial Waste.
At length the pious Queen the Earth descry'd,
Till now by Distance, to her Sight deny'd:
This dusky Planet, this Terrestrial Ball
Appear'd so mean, so dispicably small,
It seem'd unworthy of a Place or Name,
Among the Worlds, that form this universal Frame.

When the bless'd Seraph, by a swift Return,
His Royal Charge had to her Palace born,
From Earth the radiant Minister withdrew,
And back to Heav'n for new Instructions flew.
Long in her Thoughts Britannia's Queen revolv'd
These Heav'nly Scenes, doubtful and unresolv'd,
If while the wond'rous Vision she had seen,
Out of, or in the Body she had been.

Mean time, till Heav'n had Philip's Force suppress'd,
And Queen Eliza's Fleet with Triumph bless'd;
Britannia's Host, Vere's Order to obey,
Close in their Camp near famous Bruga lay.
Britons and Belgians in defensive Arms
Waited th' Event of Philip's Sea-alarms.
That if the Storm, that gather'd on the Main,
On Albion's Shore should spend its Rage in vain;
And if the fam'd, unconquerable Fleet,
(So was the vast Armada stil'd) should meet
A Foe, whose Courage might their Hopes defeat,
And force them with Dishonour to retreat:
The Troops at Vere's Return to Belgia's Soil
Might to new Triumphs press, and nobler Spoil.

Soon as the News was to the Spaniard known,
That mighty Vere was from his Army gone,
Leaving that Country, to protect his own;
Th' assembled Gen'rals did their Sense declare,
This was the Season to renew the War.
They thought no Chief did in the Host remain
Able th' advancing Spaniard to sustain.
To storm the Briton's Camp, Wise Mansfelt mov'd,
And all the rest the great Design approv'd.
They drew their Troops, to reinforce their Host,
From the strong Places of the neighb'ring Coast.
They empty'd all the Garrisons that stood
On Iper's Banks, and winding Legia's Flood.
From Vurna's Tow'rs, and Novoporto's Strand,
To Dunkirk's Port, and Graveling's spreading Sand.
Confirm'd in Hope his Forces would prevail,
Mansfelt prepar'd the Britons to assail.

Now did the Morn, before returning Day,
With Heav'nly Roses spread the Eastern Way.
On War intent the Valiant Gen'ral rose,
And for the Combate did his Host dispose.
Grasping his Pike, bright as a Winter Star,
He led the Cohorts, and advanc'd the War.
O'er all the Field the close embattel'd Swarms
Diffus'd the dazling Terror of their Arms.
Its threat'ning Front the Army did extend,
And to the Briton's Camp its Tempest bend.
Pillars of Dust the marching Legions move,
Clouds from beneath ascend to those above.
From their high Lines the War-like Briton saw
Th' approaching Host, unmov'd by Fear or Awe.
Pleas'd with the View, and coveting the Fight,
They to th' Attack Iberia's Troops invite.
They irritate the Foe, and from afar
Mock their slow March, and ask a closer War.
Before the Briton's Camp the Army stood
Rang'd in Battalia, while the Gen'ral view'd
With prudent Care the high Entrenchments round,
The Posture of the Foe, and Nature of the Ground.
Mansfelt return'd to Valdes, gave Command
To make the On-set with his Valiant Band.

Strong Valdes, griping hard his trembling Lance,
To storm the high Entrenchments, did advance.
His fierce Battalions drawn in close Array,
Follow'd the Chief, who boldly led the way.
Soon as he came within the Cannon's Swoop,
Rang'd in dire Order on the Rampart's top;
The hollow Engines charg'd with Death unseen,
Roar, and their known destructive Task begin.
The gaping Brass sends out imprison'd Lead,
Rakes their Brigades, and lays in Rows the Dead.
Th' Iberian Band great Consternation shew'd,
When they the ghastly Face of Slaughter view'd.
Doubtful a while, and undetermin'd staid,
Asham'd to fly, and to advance afraid.
Recov'ring Heart, th' Iberian Troops at last,
To mount th' Entrenchment, in Battalia past;
But broken by the Briton's dreadful Fire,
Did in Confusion to their Friends retire.

Herman, who always with great Honour fought,
Next to the Charge his Vet'ran Cohorts brought.
The Valiant Chief the Britons Fury bore,
With Brains bespatter'd, and distam'd with Gore.
While the undaunted Hero forward prest,
A fatal Bullet enter'd deep his Breast;
And buried, in his gen'rous Heart did rest.
Stretch'd on the Ground th' expiring Warrior lay,
Hanging with eager Eyes on parting Day.

Alvaz, whose Courage did distinguish'd shine,
Bravely advanc'd to mount th' opposing Line.
Megen and Perez, follow'd Sword in Hand,
Gouramno flew, their Progress to withstand.
He with his high rais'd Sword did Alvaz meet,
And laid the Spaniard prostrate at his Feet.
A while he strove with the strong Pangs of Death,
Then in a deep-fetch'd Groan resign'd his Breath.
Intent on dire Revenge, with wond'rous Rage
Megen came on, the Briton to engage.
He did his Strength in Battel fam'd exert,
And hop'd to pierce Gouramno's Noble Heart.
His vig'rous Thrust the Briton did sustain,
Which had with ease a vulgar Warrior slain.
Gouramno fir'd, lifts his destructive Blade,
Which had so many mournful Widows made;
So many Parents of their Sons bereft,
So many Children without Fathers left;
And with prodigious Force assail'd the Foe,
Discharging on his Crest a fatal Blow:
The Warrior deeply wounded in the Head,
Fell, and encreas'd the Number of the Dead.
Perez press'd forward with Iberian Pride,
By high Descent to ancient Kings ally'd,
But War and Death do no Distinction know
Of Rich or Poor, of High Descent or Low.
The mighty Spaniard by Gouramno slain,
Did with his Noble Blood the Dust distain.
Her Valiant Sons let not Iberia blame,
Accuse their Conduct, or reproach their Name;
The fatal Field does no Disgrace afford,
For tho' they fell, 'twas by Gouramno's Sword.

Their Leaders slain, the daunted Troops retir'd:
The Gen'ral all with Indignation fir'd,
Gave the Command, that Lara should ascend
The Works, which Valiant Fairfax did defend.
The Noble Spaniard with a Martial Air,
Boldly advanc'd, and undertook the War.
His cheerful Troops, Estramadura's Pride,
On whose known Courage all their Host rely'd,
March'd fearless on, near yet in Combate quell'd,
One Hand their Sword, one their Granado held.
While Fairfax strove th' Invader to repel,
Thick on the Ground the slaughter'd Spaniards fell;
Yet their brave Troops his furious Fire sustain'd,
And the wide Ditch around th' Entrenchment gain'd.
The Lines they mounted, and amidst the Foe
Did flaming Tempests of Granados throw.
Then with their Swords they cut their bloody Way,
And strove, like Valiant Warriors, for the Day.
This sharp Assault the Briton did withstand,
Maintain'd his Ground, and still the Rampart mann'd.
The Britons did their native Courage show,
Bore all their Fire, and charg'd in turn the Foe.
The Warriors firm, resolv'd, and obstinate,
Prolong'd the Combate, with uncertain Fate.
The Spaniard now, and now the Britons yield,
And in their turn they win, and lose the Field.
While Vict'ry undetermin'd did decide
For neither part, and War from side to side,
With equal Kindness roll'd its quick alternate Tide.
When Mansfelt, anxious for the great Event,
A fresh Supply of Troops to Lara sent.
Thus strongly reinforc'd, he with his Fire
Oblig'd th' out-number'd Britons to retire.

Horatio, who with a Wise Gen'ral's Care,
Watch'd all the Turns, and Motions of the War.
Seeing his Friends hard press'd, retreat in Fight,
Brought up his Cohorts to prevent their Flight.
They with Horatio's Presence reinspir'd,
With his Example, Looks, and Language fir'd,
Felt in their Breasts their kindled Courage glow,
And with redoubled Fury charg'd the Foe.
A noble Fight within the Camp arose,
And Death did all her dreadful Shapes disclose.
Files engag'd Files, Cohort on Cohort rush'd,
Some wav'd their Swords, some with their Lances push'd.
In close Array the fighting Pike-men stood,
A military Grove, a warring Wood.
Loud Rage, Distraction, Clamours, mingled Crys,
Disturb the peaceful Region of the Skies.
The Belgian Hills thro' all the ecchoing Air,
Return the dreadful Sound, and multiply the War.
Here Lara rag'd, there brave Horatio's Hand
Hew'd down the Troops, that did his Arms withstand.
There Sanches carry'd his impetuous Storm,
Here Herbert's Sword did wond'rous Deeds perform.

Brave Maximilian in another part,
Did the true Courage of his House exert.
He midst a thousand Terrors undismay'd,
To Danger no Respect, to Death no Rev'rence paid.
With martial Ardor flashing in his Eyes,
The Hannoverian Tempest onward flies.
Lodron, a Lord in Arms of great Renown,
With his first Honour did the German crown:
Beneath the Ear he felt the fatal Wound,
And gasping lay, and grov'ling on the Ground.
He fetch'd deep Throbs, and everlasting Night
Her Sable Curtain drew before his Sight.
Taxis advancing to avenge his Friend,
Did in the Dust his lifeless Limbs extend.
The Illustrious German's Fauchion split his Head;
He fell without a Groan or Struggle, dead.
Th' intrepid Prince broke thro' the thick Brigade,
He Slain on Slain, Weapon on Weapon laid,
And horrid Carnage thro' their Army made.

Alban mean time, to every Briton dear,
Prince Maximilian's, and Horatio's Care:
Eager in Battel to exalt his Fame,
Midst God-like Heros to enrol his Name,
Greedy of Glory, studious to appear
An Off-spring worthy of the mighty Vere,
Near Maximilian did the Foe engage,
And Wonders did, exceeding far his Age.
Which newly had disclos'd the Manly Grace,
And blooming Beauties of his downy Face.
He in his Looks display'd unrival'd Charms,
Sweet as a Cherub, and as bold in Arms.
Hugo, a valiant, young Gallician Lord,
Fell the first Victim of brave Alban's Sword.
Gay Burgos next, distinguish'd from the rest
By his rich Silver Belt, and checker'd Vest;
Deep wounded in his Thigh by Alban's Spear,
Fainting with Torture, halted to the Reer.
He slew Ferraro next, the noble Stroke
Between the Eyebrows thro' the Forehead broke.
With this Success the youthful Hero flush'd,
And by immoderate Fire and Courage push'd;
He onward press'd, and plung'd himself too far
Amidst the Ranks, to seek unequal War.

Now did the thick Battalions of the Foes,
On every side the brave young Lord enclose.
The noble Youth a stout Resistance made,
While Hostile Arms did every way invade.
He undismay'd th' ungen'rous War withstood,
Tho' wounded much, and faint with flowing Blood.
The Hannoverian Prince to Alban dear,
As Alban was to him, or he to Vere,
Soon as he saw, for his brave Friend afraid,
Broke thro' the thick Brigade to bring him Aid.
Gale, Lovelace, valiant Norris, all enrag'd
To see the valiant Vere too far engag'd;
With Sword in Hand did thro' the Cohorts spring,
To find the Youth, and timely Succour bring.
These famous Heros soon the Storm despell'd,
And with resistless Arms the Foe repell'd.
But ah, unhappy Youth!  ah, rigid Fate!
Thy gen'rous Friends, brave Alban, came too late.
The wounded Briton pale, and stagg'ring stood,
Weak with Profusion of his noble Blood.
Great Maximilian with officious Haste,
Alban, while sinking, in his Arms embrac'd.
With tender Care he from the Battel led
His wounded Friend, and laid him on his Bed.
The Hannoverian Chief o'er-whelm'd with Grief,
That he too late came to the Youth's Relief,
With Floods of Tears bewail'd the fatal Blow,
And with his Anguish did distracted grow.
His raving Grief to Indignation turn'd,
And in his Breast revengeful Choler burn'd.
Back to the Battel all enrag'd he flew,
And of the Foe prodigious Numbers slew.

Mean time renown'd Horatio did maintain
A noble Fight, and by his Arms were slain
Many brave Youths, and famous Chiefs of Spain.
But tho' the Gen'ral did such Courage show,
He could not from the Camp remove the Foe.
For prudent Mansfelt did with watchful Care,
Still with new Succours feed the fainting War.
Mauritius, who dispensing Orders stood,
And the sharp Strife, and bloody Labour view'd;
Who had perform'd a chief Commander's part,
With wary Wisdom, and applauded Art,
Rous'd his Brigades, and marching at their Head,
The Belgian Cohorts to the Combate led.
The Fight was doubtful, when the great Nassau
Did with a steddy Courage charge the Foe.
He plung'd amidst the Ranks, and certain Fate
Did the great Chief's victorious Weapons wait.
Unnumber'd Warriors did his Fury feel,
And in their Veins receiv'd the fatal Steel:
As raging Storms, which o'er the Mountains pass,
Lay flat the Forrests, and the Groves deface;
So did the Belgian, Mansfelt's Troops repel,
Before him so the slaughter'd Spaniards fell.
The Britons strengthen'd with the Belgian's Aid,
Did with new Fire th' Iberian Troops invade.
The noble Charge soon chang'd the doubtful Field,
The heartless Spaniard now began to yield.
They quit the Fight, and o'er th' Entrenchment run,
And leave the Briton's Camp, to gain their own.
Hard on the Reer the Briton's Tempest beat,
And gall'd them sore in their confus'd Retreat.

The valiant Chiefs, the Vict'ry thus acquir'd,
Left the Pursuit, and to their Camp retir'd.
They Thanks to Heav'n with joyful Mind express,
That bless'd their Arms, and crown'd them with Success.
But O, how much their Pleasure did abate,
When first they heard of Alban's hapless Fate!
Greatly afflicted, sad Mauritius went,
Attended with the Chiefs, to Alban's Tent.
Where to their boundless Grief, the Gen'rals found
The noble Youth expiring of his Wound.
Each to his Tent with a sad Heart return'd,
Much valiant Vere's, much Britain's Loss they mourn'd.
Only Horatio with the Youth did stay,
The last dear Offices of Love to pay.

Some Hours brave Alban agonizing lay,
His Strength declining by a swift Decay:
Cold Sweats, deep Sighs, short, interrupted Breath,
Sadly presag'd the near approach of Death.
The Sons of Art, ah fruitless Art!  stood by,
And look'd, as they too destin'd were to die.
His Heart its vital Labour scarce sustain'd,
And Life's dim Lamp a doubtful Flame maintain'd.
He with his Fate contended, but as soon
As Sable Night advanc'd, and reach'd her Noon,
The dying Youth fetch'd deep, redoubled Sighs,
And endless Night seal'd up his beauteous Eyes.
Thus did expire in sad Horatio's Arms,
Whatever War or Beauty have of Charms.
In part his Beauty did the Youth survive,
In part his Charms in Death remain'd alive.
So the gay Tulep, and the sweet Jonkyle,
Cut by the Gard'ner's unrelenting Steel,
Lie, gaudy Ruin, smiling on the Ground,
Still with their lovely Hue, and flow'ry Honours crown'd.
Mournful Horatio clos'd his Nephew's Eyes,
Bath'd him with Tears, and dry'd him with his Sighs.

With Waters sweet, with odoriferous Gums,
Arabia's Drugs, and India's rich Perfumes,
They wash'd th' Youth, who tho' bereav'd of Breath,
Preserv'd a pleasing Look, and smil'd in Death.
In finest Linnen in Hollandia made,
They with officious Care the Body laid.
With high rais'd Pillows, prop'd his lovely Head,
And o'er the Corps a Velvet Cov'ring spread.
Around the Bed his mournful Servants stood,
And Torrents from their Eyes of liquid Sorrow flow'd.
They seem'd forlorn, and hopeless of Relief,
Stupid with Woe, benumm'd and stiff with Grief.
So a young Deer, whose Front the sprouting Horn
With the first Velvet Honours does adorn,
Prais'd for his Beauty, for his Vigor fear'd,
At once the Pride and Envy of the Herd.
Ah!  hapless Fate!  by cruel Huntsmen slain,
Lies, lovely Victim, bleeding on the Plain.
So a young Cedar, whose conspicuous Head
The fragrant Groves on Mocha's Hills survey'd;
Which strait and tall, the present Glory stood,
The Hopes and promis'd Guardian of the Wood;
Fell'd by the Steels untimely Stroke descends,
And on the Ground his beauteous Limbs extends.

Great Vere, who newly heard, that on the Main
Britannia's Ships had vanquish'd those of Spain;
Was by the Queen remanded to his Post,
To gain the Camp, and head the British Host.
For Britain now secure from Spain's Alarms,
No more demanded Vere's auspicious Arms.
The Gen'ral there arriv'd the second Night
After the hapless, tho' successful Fight.
As by degrees Horatio did relate
Brave Alban's valiant Deeds, and luckless Fate,
Vere, who with mighty Sorrow was opprest,
His Eyes uplifted, struck his troubled Breast.
How did the Sadness of his Looks confess
His bitter Anguish, and his vast Distress?
The afflicted Father, with the Hero strove,
The firmest Courage, with the tend'rest Love.
But Love with Grief united won the Field,
And the soft Parent made the Warrior yield.
With Reason arm'd, he labour'd to arrest
And calm the Perturbations of his Breast.
But with unequal Arms for Conquest strove,
For Reason never was a Match for Love.
How did the Storm on Tides of Passion roll?
How did it urge, and agitate his Soul?
But tho' the swelling Tides so high did flow,
He did no unbecoming Passion show;
Just was his Grief, and decent was his Woe.
Some Hours this Stress of Sorrow did endure,
But languish'd by degrees, and lost its Pow'r.
Reason and grave Discourse are spent in vain
To ease our Suff'rings, and asswage our Pain.
Sick Minds must by degrees themselves restore,
Tis Time alone can mighty Trouble cure.

His Passion's Tide subsiding, Vere at last
Some Questions ask'd about the Battel past.
To sooth his Sorrow, bad Horatio tell
Again how Alban fought, and how he fell.
Horatio more distinctly did relate
The Youth's great Actions, and unhappy Fate.
This done, the sad, afflicted Hero went,
Attended with his Chiefs, to Alban's Tent.
He saw his Son extended on the Bed,
His Cheeks defrauded of their native Red.
The tender Chief, (such all Great Heros are,)
Who was for Pity fram'd, as much as War,
At this sad Sight again began to melt,
And in his Breast his struggling Passion felt.
Alban's cold Lips the stooping Hero kist,
But then no longer could the Storm resist.
Within his lab'ring Heart, and yielding Breast,
The rising Father could not be supprest.
A Stream of Tears broke from his mournful Eyes,
And from his Bosom deep repeated Sighs.
The Chiefs around their great Affliction show,
And weep to see a Scene of so much Woe.
At last sad Vere, his Hand upon his Breast,
In moving Accents thus himself exprest.

Ah Alban!  hapless Alban!  hapless Vere!
Ah heavy Woe!  too heavy Woe to bear!
Of the dear Object of my Eyes bereft,
Am I to Sorrow doom'd, to Woe despairing left?
There pale and breathless lies my Pride and Hope,
Of my declining Years the only Prop.
On Danger why did Alban rush so far?
Why did he seek such disproportion'd War?
More cautious Steps why did not Alban take,
Or for his own, or for his Father's sake?
Were not my Joy, my Hope, my All at Stake?
How much I wish the fatal Steel had mist
My Alban's, and had pierc'd the Father's Breast?
I would with Joy have chosen to resign
My Life, O Alban!  to have rescu'd thine.
But why my Sorrow do I tell in vain?
In fruitless Accents of my Fate complain?
Why do I Alban's youthful Conduct name?
Why cast on him of my Offence the Blame?
Too much on him for Comfort I rely'd,
Too much he was my Joy, too much my Pride.
Perhaps my Alban was to me too dear,
And Heav'n in Love will not a Rival bear.
Divine Religion does pronounce it fit,
I should my Will to that of Heav'n submit.
Th' Almighty's high Command I must obey,
And bear what Burdens he thinks fit to lay.
Eternal Truth and Justice cannot err,
Still is it Righteous, when 'tis most severe.
Shall I the universal Judge arraign?
Of Wisdom Infinite, and Sov'raign Pow'r complain?
I must adore the Government Divine,
What Heav'n is pleas'd to take, I must resign;
The high Decree is past, and Vere must not repine.

