Now Arms and Stores, and Equipage aboard,
Their Topsails loosen'd, and their Ships unmoor'd,
Th' Iberians from the Shores their Navy hawl,
And down the River to the Ocean fall.
Now wealthy Tagus to the briny Flood
Rolls with his golden Sands, a martial Wood.
Their Ships so tall, so vast, so num'rous were,
Their Fleet a floating City did appear.
Another Venice, whose high Turrets rise
Amidst the Waves to beautify the Skies.
The second Night presents a Southern Gale,
Which Ships demand that to Britannia sail.

The Morn her Saffron Banner did display
From Heav'n's high Tow'rs to signify the Day:
Th' Iberian Fleet charg'd with a mighty Host,
Hoist all their Sails, and stand for Albion's Coast.
The Ship's wide Caves collected Vengeance bear,
Turgid with Death, and prominent with War.
The wanton Zephirs with the Pendants play,
Which loose in Air their waving Pride display.
The Streamers gay Defiance spread on high,
At once adorn, and terrify the Sky.
Th' unweildy Ships were on the Billows tost,
And all the Blasts, the Winds could blow, engrost.
The longest breath'd, and the most vig'rous Gales,
Are all employ'd to swell the spacious Sails.
The lofty Firs which pregnant Canvas wear,
Bear thro' the floating Clouds the floating War.
Oaks which by Land did fiercest Winds disdain,
Become obedient to them on the Main.
The lab'ring Gales with Pain the Navy shove,
And o'er the Billows heave the bounding Grove.
Strip'd of their Boughs, the naked Pines advance,
And to the Musick of the Trumpet dance.
The suff'ring Land had long endur'd before,
The heavy Burden of Iberian Pow'r;
And now the Waves their Fleet's Oppression bear,
Th' Incumbrance of the Sea, and Grievance of the Air.
They pass in long Succession o'er the Deep,
And with their Flags contiguous Aether sweep:
Their gilded Sides and Sterns improve the Day,
And with augmented Glory Heav'n repay.
His Rays recoil'd so bright, th' astonish'd Sun
Started, unmindful that they were his own.
With so much Splendor, such a pompous Train,
They put to Sea, as if the Fleet of Spain
Advanc'd to Wed, not to Subdue the Main.

Of Conquest sure the Spaniards sail'd, mean while
The Guardian Angel of the British Isle,
Who to protect her Coasts with anxious Care
Flew to and fro patrouling in the Air,
At distance false Iberia's Fleet espy'd,
Which on the passive Waves did proudly ride.

With even Pinions hov'ring in the Sky
Thus spoke the watchful Angel.  I descry
The vast Armada of presumptuous Spain,
Which lab'ring Billows seem to bear with Pain.
With how much Pride, and how much Arrogance,
With what contempt of Heav'n their Ships advance?
Shall this perfidious Navy meet Success?
Shall impious Arms the Pious Queen oppress?
Will Heav'n e'er unconcern'd, or Neuter stand
While faithless Pride due Vengeance does demand?
No, my Commission is to ward the Blow,
To stop the Progress of the haughty Foe.
'Till Albion's Queen her Navy has prepar'd,
And Forces rais'd her threatned Coasts to guard.

He said, and with Immortal Wings display'd,
Thro' yielding Air his Passage swiftly made,
To the bleak Mountains of the Snowy North,
Where Winds are form'd, and Tempests have their Birth.
Whether to try their Strength, young Storms resort,
Root Forrests up, and break the Rocks in sport.
Where hoary Winter in his frozen Cell,
Midst Hills of Ice, does unmollested dwell:
From his white Peaks and Crystal Tow'rs, defies
The distant Sun, that Southern Kingdoms fries.
He from their hollow Caves the Winds releast,
Well breath'd for Toil, and vig'rous grown by Rest.
Bad them expand their Wings, and make their way
With utmost Swiftness to th' Atlantick Sea.
To stop the Progress of Iberia's Host,
And drive the Navy from the British Coast.

Out Boreas rush'd, and meditating War
Muster'd his loud Battalions in the Air.
Swift he advanc'd with his collected Force,
Directing to the South his furious Course,
O'er spacious Seas and Lands the Tempest blows,
Desarts of Ice, and solitary Snows.
High Domes and stately Palaces defac'd
Demolish'd Towns, and laid the Forrest waste.
The lofty Pines did from the Clouds descend,
And ghastly Ruin on the Hills extend.
The noblest Oaks, which on the Mountains stood
The great Defence and Glory of the Wood,
Did on the Ground (sad Desolation) lye,
And with their Roots turn'd up amaze the Sky.

The furious Winds the Southern Ocean gain,
And beat with all their Wings the troubled Main.
They drive before them all the Atmosphere,
Whose pressing Weight does on the Billows bear,
And to the Clouds the wat'ry Columns reer.
Then the unstable Mountains fall as low,
And down as far as Night's Apartment flow;
The secret Horrors of the Gulf display,
And far enlarge the Frontier of the Day:
Disturb the ancient Waters of the Deep,
Which did in Peace their low Dominions keep,
And on their Central Beds extended lay asleep.
Th' unconstant Ocean with alternate Waves
Th' Aetherial Region now, and now th' Infernal laves.
Against the Skies their Foam the Billows throw,
And to the Clouds send back their Rain, in Snow.
The Earth's Foundation strong Convulsions shake,
Disjoint its Frame, and Hell's Partition break.
Whence pitchy Shades rise thro' the gaping Ground,
Pollute the Skies, and Heav'n with Hell confound.
Such Noise, such Uproar, such Distraction reign,
And so embroil the Land, the Air, the Main,
That Nature with th' unequal Force opprest,
In agonizing Throws her Fears confest,
That Conqu'ring Chaos would subvert her Throne,
Ruin her Empire, and restore his own.
In vain the Pilots in the Steerage stand,
The Ships obey alone the Winds Command.
Some their Masts broken, and their Rigging torn,
Are at the Pleasure of the Tempest born.
Some run a-ground, and some with dreadful Shocks
Are dash'd to pieces on opposing Rocks.
The roaring Waves and clam'rous Seamens Toil,
The watry Deep, and airey Gulf embroil.
The Ships, the Ocean, and the furious Storm
Unite their Noise, and perfect Discord form.
In vain the Sailors with the Tempest strive,
They cut their Masts, and let their Vessels drive.
Thus, by the adverse Winds, the Fleet of Spain
Was beaten back, and scatter'd o'er the Main.

This done, great Gabriel, Albion's Friend, empow'r'd
By high Commission from the Christians Lord,
Who all the raging Meteors does command,
And holds the spacious Ocean in his Hand;
Who all the willing Elements does sway,
Whose awful Voice the Storms and Seas obey;
Bad the outrageous Winds the Deep forsake,
And to the Frozen North their Passage make.
The Winds obedient, leave in Peace the Waves,
And fly submissive to their Nothern Caves.
With their cold Wings they sweep th' Etherial Road,
Impatient to regain their bleak Abode.
Panting for Breath, and with their Toil opprest,
They to their hollow Hills repair for Rest.
The Tempest fled, the tow'ring Waves subside,
And gentle Breezes play along the Tide.
With Grief the shatter'd Spaniards quit the Main,
And to refit their Ships, their Ports regain.

Urg'd by Revenge and by intenser Hate,
Th' Iberians vow'd again to try their Fate.
The adverse Winds that did oppose their Course,
Blew up their Rage, and gave it double Force.
As when a Lion roaring out for Food,
Resolv'd for Slaughter, and intent on Blood,
Forsakes the Forrest, and his cover'd Hold,
To drive the Shepherd, and destroy the Fold;
If he by chance should meet a clam'rous Band
Of well-arm'd Huntsmen, who his Course withstand;
Weary and wounded, sow'rly he retreats,
Looks back, and roaring Menaces repeats.
So to his Coasts the griev'd Iberian flew
To heal his Navy, and the War renew.
The busy Crew with wond'rous Toil and Care
Mend their torn Rigging, and their Ships repair.
They draw from all their Stores and Magazines
The Hemp for Cables, and for Masts the Pines.
For supplemental Ribs with vig'rous Strokes
Athletick Shipwrights fell the neighb'ring Oaks.
Hills bless'd with shady Honours they uncrown,
And from the Mountains pull their Glory down.

In ancient Times, when Aegypt's haughty Lord
Oppress'd the Tribes, who Jacob's God ador'd;
Tho' various Plagues the cruel Tyrant felt,
No tender Passion did his Bowels melt.
The more he suffer'd Heav'n's afflicting Hand,
To vex the Tribes, the more he gave Command.
In unrelenting Malice persever'd,
Harden'd with Ruin, and with Vengeance sear'd.
So tho' th' Almighty did on Tempests ride
To guard Britannia from Iberian Pride.
Did on the Seas in Wrath the Spaniard meet,
And with his Breath disperse their shatter'd Fleet;
Th' Iberian Pharoah more outrageous grew,
His black Design more eager to pursue.
Their Ships refitted, they their Anchors weigh,
Once more their Pendants, and their Flags display.
With turgid Sails enclose a prosp'rous Wind,
And leave the less'ning Hills, and flying Shores behind.

Mean time the Queen, Britannia's Coast to guard,
Had both her Army, and her Fleet prepar'd.
She her high Order sent by Dawn of Morn,
To the great Vere to hasten his Return;
That he might Albion with his Arms defend,
If on her Coast th' Iberian should descend.
The mighty Hero did without delay
Prepare Eliza's Orders to obey.
He making haste to reach the Belgian Strand,
Horatio left his Army to command.
He did direct they should their Camp secure,
And well entrench'd, expect th' Iberian Pow'r.
To Belgia's Shores he came with speedy Toil,
Eager to sail, and make Britannia's Isle:
But there the Chief long with Regret remain'd,
By adverse Winds on Belgia's Coast detain'd.

The Queen did more on Aid Divine depend,
Than on her Arms, her Kingdom to defend.
She to th' Almighty's Pleasure did refer
The Turns of Empire, and th' Events of War.
She knew, he lov'd the just, tho' weaker Side,
Rais'd Vertue press'd, and sunk Tyrannick Pride.
That from their Thrones he does at Pleasure thrust
Proud Kings, and rolls their Purple in the Dust:
That to the Ground he haughty Princes treads,
And of their Lawrels strips victorious Heads:
That mighty Kings their Impotence may know,
And Conqu'rours learn, whence all their Vict'ries flow.
Unless kind Heav'n's Assistance they obtain,
The Warrior fights, the Statesman wakes in vain.

Britain's Good Queen, for true Devotion fam'd,
Thro' all the Realm a solemn Fast proclaim'd
Heav'n's Wrath to deprecate, and to invoke
Coelestial Aid to ward th' impending Stroke.
The Queen's Command the Britons did obey,
Strictly Devout did solemnize the Day,
And all their Sins lament, and for Remission pray.
They humbly prostrate did their God adore,
With pious Ardour heav'nly Aid implore.
With sacred Violence and holy Rage,
Did seize his Mercy, and his Pow'r engage.
Devoutly thus they did with Heav'n contend,
And strive with fervent Zeal, to make their God their Friend.

Now did the Britons, riding on the Main,
Eager to fight, demand the Fleet of Spain.
The valiant Howard, an illustrious Name,
Whose noble House has rais'd Britannia's Fame,
Had Chief Command of Albion's Royal Fleet;
Few braver Men did ever Danger meet.
Next in Command great Drake his Flag display'd,
To whose true Merit high Respect was paid.
He to the Terrors of the Ocean known,
In labour verss'd, in Danger fearless grown,
Met Death in all her Shapes, but dreaded her in none.
He undiscover'd Regions to explore,
With hardy Sails pass'd Tides unknown before:
Thro' rapid Currents, liquid Defiles,
Eddies, stupendious Gulphs, and horrid Seas,
Did to the World's remotest Frontier go,
To Albion's Youth did Nature's Wonders show,
And made each Indian World, the Great Eliza know.

Brave Hawkins and the valiant Frobisher,
Shefield and Preston, famous Sons of War;
Illustrious Seimour of a Noble Race,
Fruitful of Heros, who Britannia grace.
Rawleigh for Letters, as for Arms renown'd,
All Chiefs by Sea, with frequent Triumphs crown'd;
Were high Commanders by Eliza made,
And next to Drake, were by the Fleet obey'd.

The Scouts the Signal gave, that they descry'd
Th' Iberian Fleet advancing on the Tide.
The Britons see the faithless Foe from far,
And with a brave Impatience wait the War.
By slow Degrees th' Iberian coming near,
Did on the Seas with such a Face appear,
As all, but Albion's Youth, might be allow'd to fear.
The Billows ne'er so vast a Burden bore,
The straining Winds ne'er toil'd so hard before.
Ships of prodigious Bigness load the Flood,
Each seem'd a Castle, and her Masts a Wood.
The Foes could scare their num'rous Navy count,
So endless was their Reer, and so immense their Front.
The glorious Squadrons awful Order keep,
And move in slow Procession on the Deep.
Their Ensigns proudly streaming in the Air,
The Fleet half Gilt, half Painted, seem'd to wear
Rather the Face of Triumph, than of War.
As if already Britain's Isle subdu'd
Had to the Conq'rour for Protection su'd:
That Philip's Fleet Possession came to take,
And on the British Seas a publick Entrance make.
Stretching from Gallia's to Britannia's Coast,
The mighty Navy all the Main engrost.
On either Shore their Ships extended ride,
The Channel cover, and detain the Tide.

Wise Howard saw them pass, but lay behind
To give his Fleet th' Advantage of the Wind.
But then advancing from the British Shore,
Stood off to Sea, and on the Spaniard bore.
In Strength out-done, in Ships out-number'd far,
The Valiant Hero sought th' unequal War.
Immortal Drake, who led the British Van,
Boldly bore down, and the fierce Fight began.
He to a close and bloody Combate came,
Venting his Wrath in Thunder, Smoke and Flame.
Rechaldo did the Spaniard's Van Command,
And Drake's first On-set dauntless did withstand.
As a tall Pine his shady Head displays,
And proudly all the subject Grove surveys;
So did the Spaniard with disdainful Pride,
O'er-looking all the British Squadron ride.
High on his tow'ring Deck, he Drake withstood,
And to the Briton's Ship oppos'd a lofty Wood.
With Scorn the Spaniard look'd on Drake below,
He heard and felt, but scarcely saw the Foe.
Drake did his Fury on th' Iberian pour,
As from a Batt'ry rais'd against a Tow'r.
The mighty Foe with Indignation burns,
And Peal for Peal, and Fire for Fire returns.
Broadside and Broadside they together ly,
And with alternate Deaths each other ply.
With dreadful Noise the bellowing Cannon play,
And mutual Wounds in mutual Fire convey.
The valiant Drake pursu'd the bloody Strife,
Thoughtless of Wounds, and negligent of Life.
Till Great Rechaldo rack'd from Head to Stern,
And with the Briton's furious Tempest torn,
Shatter'd, disabled, and a useless Load,
Was by his Gallies from the Battel tow'd.
Leiva, a Chief accustom'd to the Main,
Lopez and Silva, famous Names in Spain,
Brought their high Ships Rechaldo to sustain.
Dora, Moncado, for their Courage known,
And Bovadil, a Chief of great Renown,
Sprung all their Sails, and by their Gallies Aid
They got the Wind the Briton to invade.
Encompass'd thus, and charg'd on every side,
Great Drake enrag'd, his thund'ring Cannon ply'd.
Roaring Destruction from his Vessel broke,
And pond'rous Deaths flew thick in Clouds of Smoke.
His British Heart with Martial Rage inspir'd,
So fast, so fierce, so close the Gen'ral fir'd,
That he the Spaniard at a distance held,
And all who dar'd approach his Ship, repell'd.
As when a Lion on Numidian Plains
Is compass'd round by Dogs and clam'rous Swains,
He from his Eyes Defiance casts around,
Roars out, and proudly traverses the Ground.
Demanding gen'rous Combate, does invite
The distant Huntsmen to a closer Fight.
They stand aloof, and missive Weapons throw,
But none dare grapple with the noble Foe.
So did the Iberian Combatants from far
On the brave Briton pour ungen'rous War.
But their whole Fleet did not a Chief afford,
Who durst advance, and lay the Foe on Board.

Thus Drake was press'd.  Hawkins and Frobisher,
Both Men of Valour, and expert in War,
Both Flag-Commanders, brought the Gen'ral Aid;
And with great Fury did the Foe invade.
On either side the Foe outrageous grew,
And Deaths unseen in dreadful Tempests flew.
Destruction they exchange, by Turns they give
Exploded Ruin, and by Turns receive.
The Cannons Roar did distant Regions scare,
Shake all the Shores, and torture all the Air;
With a strange Tempest did becalm the Deep,
Compose the Waves, and lay the Winds asleep.
Long did the Fight with wond'rous Ardor last,
From Fleet to Fleet prodigious firing past:
As still it did, where Drake had Chief Command,
If Hostile Squadrons would his Onset stand:
Till the Iberian by the Briton's Fire
Severely gall'd, did from his Rage retire.
Their Fleet retreated with declining Day,
Stood off, and up the Channel made their way.
Impetuous Drake did on their Squadrons bear,
And play'd pursuing Vengeance on their Reer.
Mean time a vast Cantabrian Galeon,
Who did great Valdez as Commander own,
Maim'd and unmasted in the furious Chase,
Kept with th' Iberian Fleet unequal Pace.
The lazy Load unfit to make her way,
It self a Forrest, on the Billows lay:
The Ocean groan'd beneath the mighty Hull,
Both of the Army, and its Treasure full.
Great Drake advancing, took the floating Fort,
And sent the Captives to the neighb'ring Port.
Drake and his Crew their Wishes did obtain,
He had the Honour, and his Men the Gain.
The joyful Youth th' Iberian Riches shar'd,
Their Labour's Golden Fruit, and first Reward.
On their own Shores they now the Indies got,
The Wealth they us'd to fetch, the Spaniard kindly brought.
The friendly Night her Sable Mantle cast
Around th' Iberian, by the Briton chas'd.
The interposing Shade extended lay,
To interrupt the Conqu'ror's Course, and stay
The bloody Labour of the glorious Day.

Twice did the Sun these airy Regions clear
From Shade, and twice the adverse Hemisphere.
When the Britannick Fleet again descry'd
The Spanish Navy cov'ring all the Tide.
The British Captains crowded all their Sail,
And with Assistance of a Western Gale,
Up with th' Iberian Navy quickly came,
And loud Broadsides their Presence did proclaim.
Th' Iberian Fleet, drawn out in long Array,
Did o'er the Deep its dreadful Wings display.
Th' extended Squadrons all the Channel crost,
From Vecta's Isle to Gallia's wond'ring Coast.
Perez, Medina's Duke, who did command
The mighty Fleet, did in the Center stand.
Howard, th' illustrious General did assail,
Discharging massy Show'rs of fatal Hail.
His murth'ring Ord'nance on the Spaniard hung,
And in prodigious Peals his Terrors rung.
His Thunder's Voice the Foes with Horror strook,
And all the vast Iberian Forrest shook.
Tho' on the Hills their lofty Firs and Oaks
Had scap'd Aetherial Wrath, and Meteors furious Strokes,
Yet on the Seas a harder Fate they meet,
By British Light'nings torn, and riving Thunder spilt.
With Martial Rage the Noble Spaniard burn'd,
And pond'rous Fate in Storms of Fire return'd.
Prodigious Clamour and promiscuous Sound,
Did from the frighted Main, and ecchoing Rocks rebound.
Terrestrial Light'nings thro' the Air did fly,
And by returns of loud Artillery,
The Sea repaid the Clouds, and reimburs'd the Sky.
The proud Iberians to th' invading Foes,
Castles embattled, and tall Forts oppose.
Their gilded Tow'rs above the Clouds arise,
And add new Glories to the wond'ring Skies.

The Balls that from their Decks the Spaniards threw,
Above the Briton's low-built Navy flew.
Their roaring Guns discharg'd their Shot in vain,
They only rak'd the Air, and vext the Main.
Their Ships were so sublime, and every Hull,
Was with their Troops, and Mariners so full,
That an unerring Fate did still attend
The thick Broadsides, the British Ships did send.
Death ne'er of Disappointment did complain,
Or on the Briton's Fire rely'd in vain.
Dismember'd Trunks, torn Limbs, and scatter'd Brain,
A ghastly Medly, did their Decks distain.
Down the high sides red Rivers flow'd of Blood,
And with Iberian Purple dy'd the Flood.
The Noise of Seamen on their Toil intent,
Of falling Masts, of Sails and Rigging rent,
The dreadful Groans of wounded Mariners,
The Cannons Roar, and Spaniards clam'rous Fears,
Such formidable Scenes of Horror made,
As on the Main were ne'er before display'd.
The British Vessels all low built and light,
All nimble Sailors, and as fit for Fight:
Active for all the Duties of the Sea,
To tack about, to charge or bear away.
With great Success assail'd th' encumber'd Foe,
Unfit for War, tho' terrible for Show:
Their mighty Ships lay on the suff'ring Flood,
Unweildy as the Hills, where once they stood.
A match for Tempests they the Ocean press'd,
Dissabled by their Strength, by their own Weight distress'd.
Again th' Iberian Fleet began to yield,
And to the Briton quit the liquid Field.

Satan, who on the Promontory stood
Of Vecta's Isle, and over-look'd the Flood;
Beheld the Combate, and with anxious Care
Waited the Issue of th' important War.
Seeing his Spanish Friends so much distress'd,
And by the Conqu'ring Briton's Navy press'd,
He calls the busy Demons of the Air,
Who Meteors manage, and who Storms prepare.
Who verss'd in Thunder, Snow, and Hail, and Rain,
Can either trouble, or compose the Main:
Can as they bring, or chase the Mists away,
By turns extinguish, and revive the Day.
Th' Aeirial Spirits at their Lord's Command
Arrive obsequious, and around him stand.
To whom their Prince.  Industrious Spirits fly,
Make haste to darken all th' Inferior Sky.
Afford your Aid to choak th' offensive Light,
Spread o'er the Spanish Navy welcome Night,
And save our faithful Friends from ignominious Flight.

He spoke.  They bow.  Their Bat-like Wings display,
And fly their Monarch's Order to obey.
Some penetrate each hollow Cave and Cell,
Where raw and undigested Vapours dwell.
Some pond'rous Damps from Kentish Marshes bear,
And lazy Mists, that hung in Sussex Air.
Some Exhalations fetch, that hover'd round
The neighb'ring Rocks, and Heads of Mountains crown'd;
Which had not Wings of Strength enough to climb
The Atmosphere, and float in Air sublime.
The Demons did their black Collection pour
On all the Sea, th' Iberian to secure.
A wond'rous Fog arose, and friendly Night
Embrac'd the Spaniard, and conceal'd his Flight,
Who all his Sails employ'd, and all his Oars,
To make the Streights, and gain Caleta's Shores.
Where they believ'd they should Parmensis meet,
Should be assisted with his Flandrian Fleet:
Thus reinforc'd, they still resolv'd to Land
Their num'rous Army on the British Strand.

Mean time, on fam'd Tilburia's verdant Plains,
Which well reward the Toil of neighb'ring Swains,
A fertile Region, which with brackish Waves,
Fair Thames infected by the Ocean, laves.
The British Army in Battalia lay,
And did Great Leicester as their Head, obey.
If Albion's Navy with long Labour spent,
Should not defeat the haughty Foes Descent:
The Britons took this advantageous Post,
To offer Battel to th' advancing Host.

Heither Britannia's War-like Empress came,
To Head her Troops, and animate their Flame.
She came resolv'd to Face the faithless Foes,
Her precious Life for Britain to expose.
That she her Kingdom might from Ruin shield,
The Warrior Queen in Person took the Field.
A noble Courser bore th' Imperial Maid,
And with a conscious Pride the Hand obey'd,
Which held the Reins of Empire, and a Scepter sway'd.
Th' embroider'd Trappings, which on either side
Hung glorious down, encreas'd his native Pride.
Pleas'd with the dazling Ornaments he wore,
But with the bright, Majestick Rider more.
He paw'd the Vally, foam'd, curvetted, neigh'd,
He champt his Golden Bit, and with his Bridle play'd.
With Martial Mein the Scepter'd Virgin rode,
The Steed scarce press'd the Grass, on which he trod.
This held the Courser's Reins, the other Hand
Grasp'd her Gilt Staff, which shew'd Supream Command.
She pass'd the Squadrons and Battalions thro',
Drawn out in long Array for her Review.
She thro' the Muskets rode, and thro' a Wood
Of bristling Pikes, that in Battalia stood.
She did a Leader Amazon appear,
Forgetful of her Sex, and ignorant of Fear.
Th' intrepid Queen view'd with a cheerful Air
The Iron Wings, and the sowr Brows of War.
Her God-like Presence did the Troops inspire,
Heighten their Courage, and dilate their Fire.

Heroick Bards in tuneful Fables sing,
That War-like Pallas to her Friends did bring
New Fire and Force, when she appear'd in sight
To aid their Arms, and Courage to excite.
This truly may be sung of Albion's Queen,
Who by her Presence and Seraphick Mein,
By moving Language, and a gracious Air,
Did with fresh Life invigorate the War:
She did the Soldiers and their Leaders praise,
Encourage all, and by Pathetick Ways,
Their Hopes enliven, and their Ardor raise.
She by the Wonders, which their Arms had done,
By all their Trophies gain'd, and Laurels won,
Conjur'd her Chiefs, their Honour to maintain,
And guard their Country from the Pow'r of Spain.

Her Chiefs were most renown'd, for Albion then
A wond'rous Harvest bore of Wise and Valiant Men.
The mighty Bertu, whose illustrious Name
Rivall'd the Captains of the highest Fame,
Whose honourable Deeds, and martial Skill
Adorn his noble House, and Britain's Annals fill;
In whom Eliza plac'd a mighty Trust,
Was second in Command, in Merit first.
Great Norris oft with Belgick Laurels crown'd,
Thro' all Europa's Realms for Arms renown'd;
Brave Knowls, and Noble Grey, who in the Line
Of British Heros do conspicuous shine.
Cary and Bingham, famous Chiefs by Land,
Were Captains in the Host of high Command.
On these great Warriors oft in Battel try'd,
And for their Conduct fam'd, the Queen reply'd.

As the great Queen excites the Soldier's Fire,
If Britain's Safety should his Arms require,
So on the Business of the Sea intent,
She did a War-like Stratagem invent,
To disappoint the treach'rous Foe's Descent.
Drake by the Queen's Direction, ready made
Destructive Fires, the Spaniard to invade.
He chose eight Frigats, with long Labour worn,
With Tempests shatter'd, or with Cannon torn.
He did their Sides thick with Bitumen smear,
Their Decks and Sterns with Pitch and unctious Tar.
Their Holds he fill'd with all the burning Stores
From European, or from Indian Shores.
Which distant Swecia or Norwegia yield,
From wounded Pines, and weeping Firs distill'd;
The fiery Product of the frozen North,
Which owe to Ice and Snows their wond'rous Birth;
Puzzola's Entrails, and the sulph'rous Spoil
Rais'd from the Caverns of Calabria's Soil,
And smoky Furnace of Sicila's Isle.
All Things combustible which Nature gives,
Or which for surer Ruin Art contrives,
They with amazing Labour bring aboard,
And in their Holds Vesuvian Treasures hoard.
The Spanish Fleet, which favour'd by the Night
And rising Fogs, escap'd the Conq'ror's Sight,
Made to the Doroberian Streights their way,
And at an Anchor near Caleta lay.

'Twas Night, when Nature was in Sables drest,
Tempestuous Winds in hollow Caves did rest.
Impending Rocks with Slumber seem'd to bow,
And drousy Mountains hung their heavy Brow.
The weary Waves roll'd nodding on the Deep,
Or stretch'd on Oasy Beds they murmur'd in their Sleep.
But Drake not so.  He with Impatience lay
Waiting Eliza's Orders to obey.
A Western Breeze sprang up.  Drake gave Command.
His valiant Men with Firebrands in their Hand,
The Frigats stow'd with hidden Ruin steer,
To make th' Iberians, and advancing near,
The bold Commanders set their Ships on Fire,
And in their Long-boats to their Fleet retire.
The kindled Vengeance reers its dreadful Head,
And all around Aetnean Terrors spread.
With dismal Wings the crackling Flames arise,
Shoot out their ruddy Tongues, and lick the Skies.
The Airy Regions shines with hideous Light,
And horrid Day dispels less horrid Night.
The Flames so wide their Terror did extend,
So high the bright Destruction did ascend,
As if the Deep did to the Clouds aspire
In burning Waves, and Pyramids of Fire.
The Conflagration did around display
Suppositious and unnatural Day.
Industrious Swains believing Night was fled,
Break of their Slumber, and forsake their Bed:
Then wondring stand, to see the Air so bright,
Not with the Sun's, but with the Ocean's Light:
To see a strange, untimely Day arise,
A spurious Birth, not conscious of Skies.

The Western Winds, the burning Frigats bear,
And on the Spaniards drive the blazing War.
Soon as the sailing Flames (amazing Sight!)
Approach'd their Navy, in the Dead of Night,
Strange Consternation struck the trembling Host;
They all believ'd their Troops and Navy lost.
No Faces in Distress did ever wear
Terror so strong, or such bold Strokes of Fear.
Horror was ne'er to such Advantage seen,
Ne'er show'd so dire a Look, so wild a Mein.
The great Destraction, that possess'd their Eyes
The Sailor's Clamors, and the Soldier's Crys,
Their uncouth Howling, and their hideous Yell,
No Fancy can conceive, no Language tell.
Some cut their Cables by their Chief's Command,
Some to the breathing Winds their Sails expand.
Shov'd by the Gale, and wing'd with speedy Fear,
They from contagious Flames, and bright Perdition steer.
The Spaniard's Haste was render'd by his Fright
So rash, and so precipitate his Flight,
That none by Night his Neighbour could avoid,
They were by Friends, as well as Foes destroy'd.

A dreadful Out-cry on the Deep began,
Ships fell on Ships, Gallies on Gallies ran.
Rigging with Rigging met, and Mast with Mast,
And Sails, with fatal Friendship, Sails embrac'd.
Diego, Oquendo, thus entangled lay,
And to a Ship on Fire became a Prey.
The raging Flame did first their Sails invade,
Which to the Decks the catching Plague convey'd.
Soon did the burning Spaniards blaze on high,
At once enlighten, and affright the Sky.
With fruitless Toil the Crew oppose the Flame,
No Art can now the spreading Mischief tame.
Some choak'd and smother'd, did expiring ly,
Burn with their Ships, and on the Water fry.
Some, when the Flames could be no more withstood,
So wild Despair directed, midst the Flood
Themselves in haste from their tall Vessels threw,
And from a dry, to liquid Ruin flew.
Sad Choice of Death, when those, who shun the Fire,
Must to as fierce an Element retire.
Uncommon Suff'rings did these Wretches wait,
Both burnt and drown'd they met a double Fate.
The Britons gave the Spanish Navy Chase,
Which lay dispers'd o'er all the Ocean's Face.
They to the Seas or Shores their Passage made,
Whither the Winds and Waves their Ships convey'd.
Perez no more his Squadrons could collect,
They all Commands, but those of Fear, neglect.

The Morn did now her Purple Standard reer,
To which the must'ring Sun Beams did repair.
Th' advancing Britons did their Order keep,
And view'd the Ruin which deform'd the Deep.
Here glowing Planks, and ghastly Ribs of Oak,
Here smoaking Beams and Masts in sunder broke,
Nor Coal entirely, nor entirely Wood,
Roll on the Billows, and pollute the Flood.
Here gilded Sterns, there ample Lanterns float,
And curious Shapes by Master-Carvers wrought.
There half burnt Lions on the Waters grin,
And sooty Leopards loose their spotted Skin.
The gazing Fishes are amaz'd to see
The Monsters of the Forrest swim the Sea.
Here a Religious Wreck the Ocean loads,
With broken Limbs of Saints, and ruin'd Gods.
Reliques of famous Vertue, Holy Beads,
Bless'd Trinkets, glowing Trunks, and smoaking Heads
Of consecrated Guardian Images,
A superstitious Lumber, spread the Seas.

Britannia's Chiefs with eager speed pursue
Th' Iberians, who in sep'rate Squadrons flew.
They run with all their Sails, and all their Oars,
Some seek the Gallick, some the Belgick Shores.
Driv'n by their Passion's, and the Ocean's Tide,
Midst unknown Shallows some for Safety ride.
Some to the Quick-sands for Protection row,
Sands less perfidious than King Philip's Vow.
Midst Rocks and Shelves some trembling Chiefs remain;
Rocks less obdurate, Shelves less false than Spain.
Some run aground in their too rash Retreat,
Whom the insulting Waves in pieces beat.
Some by the Billows on the Rocks were tost,
Some in the Deep, some on the Strand were lost.
A Gale sprung up, which to the Ocean bore
The Ships, which scap'd the Flandrian faithless Shore.
Perez resolv'd round by the Nothern Main,
And the Hibernian Seas to sail for Spain.
At his Command away the Captains bear
To the North Ocean wild, as their Despair.
Hard on their Reer the Conqu'ring Britons hung,
And with their Thunder on the Spaniard rung.

During the Chase two Ships became their Prey,
One Lucon, one Mandrana did obey.
The first three hundred Priests and Prelates bore,
A Sacred Cargo, and Religious Store.
The Ship a floating Convent did appear,
With Superstition stow'd, and holy Geer.
The bless'd Adventures of the Burse of Rome,
Carry Religion out, but Treasure home.
New Lights, old Reliques, consecrated Toys,
Rome's Growth or Labour, and abundant Choice
Of manufactor'd Saints they send abroad,
But homeward bound, they Gold and Silver load.
Corrupted Creeds and damag'd Faith export,
And fill with impious Commerce every Port.
They o'er the World, to find a Market, range,
And their cheap Heav'n, for Earthly Treasure change.
Now Rome believing her Religious Trade
Again in Albion would be open laid;
And that the unprovided Isle would bear,
A vast Consumption of their Godly Ware;
To Britain sent this Holy Colony,
A gracious Promise of a large Supply.
By adverse War the Roman Factors crost,
And made a Prize, their pious Labour lost.

The other Ship Alorcon bore, a Guide
Empow'r'd by Rome's Commission to preside
O'er the intended Inquisition Court,
Which Philip's Arms in Albion would support:
Who with paternal Pity might Torment,
And make Britannia's stubborn Sons relent.
The pious Father for Conversions brought
Crosses and Racks with Skill and Labour wrought.
Instructive Whips, perswasive Rods of Wire,
And Demonstrations harden'd in the Fire.
Here stood high Fats with Confutations stor'd,
And pow'rful Reasons form'd of Steel or Cord.
Here heap'd in Piles awak'ning Scourges lay,
Which Heav'nly Light upon the Back display,
And Hereticks convince the shortest Way.
There Pincers, Pullies, Wheels, a Sacred Load
Of choice Mechanick Arguments were stow'd.
Strong Reas'ning Engines of Religious Use,
Which Error scare, and Faith by Force produce.
Which have to Rome ten thousand Converts giv'n;
They draw Men up, or screw them into Heav'n.
Here stood vast Tuns of Fetters, Hooks and Chains
A Bless'd Collection of convincing Pains.

Lugo and Floris shatter'd by the Fight,
Were by the Victors taken in their Flight.
To Edenburga's Frith they chac'd the Foe,
Where to the Main Boderia's Waters flow.
The Britons many sunk, and many fir'd,
Till cloy'd with Conquest, they at length retir'd.
Their melancholy Course the Spaniards stood,
And with a lighter Burden press'd the Flood.
Eliza's Fleet was gone Triumphant home;
But Rocks and Seas untry'd, were yet to come.
The British Storm its Fury spent, was fled;
But Heav'n's black Vengeance gather'd o'er their Head.
Their bulky Ships were midst the Billows tost
On Scotia's wild, impracticable Coast.
Now with their Sails, now with their lab'ring Oars
They pass the dreadful Gulphs, and faithless Shores.
They left behind the Caledonian Hills,
And craggy Cluster of Orcadian Isles.
They past the boisterous Hyperborean Seas,
Turn'd Scotia's Cape, and made the Hebudes:
On whose abrupt, unhospitable Shore
Sea-Monsters yell, and raging Billows roar.
They sail'd not long on this impetuous Tide,
Before their Men Hibernia's Isle descry'd,
In all the Pangs of Terror and Distress,
They view the Desart Sands, and watry Wilderness.

A sudden Storm did from the South arise,
And horrid Black began to hang the Skies.
By slow Advances loaded Clouds ascend,
And cross the Air their low'ring Front extend.
Heav'n's loud Artillery began to play,
And Wrath Divine in dreadful Peals convey.
Th' Aetherial Engines Cannonade the Main,
And pour new Thunder on the Fleet of Spain.
Darkness and raging Winds their Terror join,
And Storms of Rain with Storms of Fire combine.
The trembling Spaniards now invoke in vain,
Their Saints Marine to ease them of their Pain.
Mangled with superstitious Cruelty,
Their Priests in vain to their dull Saviours Cry.
Their Reliques good for Storms or Thunder fail,
Nothing their Beads, or Wheaten Gods prevail.
With fruitless Pray'rs they ply their Sacred Wood,
Fair Weather Idols, to compose the Flood.
Some run a-Shore upon the shoaly Land,
Some Perish by the Rocks, some by the Sand.
The floating Wrecks of ruin'd Ships encrease
The native Horror of Hibernian Seas:
The Storm its Fury spent, the Waves subside,
The Sky became serene, sedate the Tide.
With the few shatter'd Ships which did remain,
Perez half Dead with Anguish, made with Pain,
By ignominious Stealth, the Ports of Spain.
As when a mighty Band of Lybian Swains,
Who trusting to their Numbers, o'er the Plains
Advance, a gen'rous Lion to destroy,
Of Conquest sure anticipate the Joy.
The Wood they compass round, they set the Toil,
And not yet Victors share the yellow Spoil.
But by the noble Foe beat back, and maim'd,
The Swains retreat, confounded and asham'd.
So the presumptuous Spaniard did return,
Did Triumph so before, and so did after mourn.

Soon as the Malecontents in Albion heard
That Spain's Armada on the Coasts appear'd:
Immod'rate Joy dilated every Breast,
Marks of unbridled Transport all exprest,
But Montal seem'd o'er-joy'd above the rest.
Among their Friends with Zeal they spread th' Alarm,
Each other cheer, each other urge to Arm.
To Kentish Shores their Ensigns they advance;
Whence trayt'rous Commerce now is held with France.
They Rendezvous upon the Marshy Ground,
Encamp their Troops, and raise Intrenchments round.
Hither from every Town their Men repair,
Resolv'd to meet and aid the Landing War.
Their Arundel Rome's Bigots did command,
The next great Chief was Lord of Westmorland.
Of half Reformists Montal was the Head,
And Bramhal next was by their Troops obey'd.
Their Treason all in desp'rate Speech express,
Sure of Iberia's, and their own Success.
They tell, how they Eliza will depose,
How they will treat those they esteem'd their Foes.
What Suff'rings they for Burleigh did prepare,
What ignominious Chains for Valiant Vere.

Thrice had the Sun display'd victorious Light,
Retreating thrice submitted to the Night;
Whilst in their Camp the Rebels did remain,
Eager to join th' expected Troops of Spain:
When to their Grief, 'twas to the Rebels known,
That the Iberian vanquish'd Fleet was gone.
That a brave Army did with Loyal Rage
March o'er the Hills, their Cohorts to engage.
Great Consternation, and amazing dread
The Leaders seiz'd, and thro' the Army spread.
Not bold enough to undertake the Fight,
The Troops dispers'd, and Safety sought by Flight.

Montal mean time stay'd raving in his Tent,
And ignominious Suff'rings to prevent,
To his old Crimes, and his new Treason due,
In his own Blood he did his Hands embrue.
Wildly he star'd, and with all Hell possest,
He plung'd his Sword deep in his impious Breast.
The irreligious Wretch in Torment lay,
While greedy Death did on his Vitals prey.
Harden'd in Guilt, relentless he appear'd,
Believ'd no future State, no Vengeance fear'd:
Did Heav'n and Hell as idle Tales deride,
Mock'd the great Doom, and Wrath Divine defy'd.
In Blasphemies he his last Breath resign'd,
And dy'd renouncing God, and cursing all Mankind.

