The Lords obedient to the King's Command,
With Pow'rs and full Credentials in their Hand,
Soon as Aurora, with her radiant Key,
Unlock'd the Gates of Light to let out Day,
Embark'd, set sail, and stood for Albion's Coast,
And with a prosp'rous Gale the Ocean crost.
Thrice had the Sun, by his victorious Light,
Been Soveraign of the Air, and twice the Night,
When Albion's Clifts were in the Envoies Sight.
And soon they enter'd, born with Wind and Tide,
The Mouth of Thames, sublime Augusta's Pride.
As they advanc'd, they view'd on either Hand
The various Blessings of the fruitful Land:
There Meadows, burden'd with their flow'ry Load,
Twice in a Summer by the Farmer mow'd:
Conspiracies of Pleasures and Delight
Were every where discover'd to their Sight.
Each Reach and Point unfolded to their View
Some fresh surprizing Scene, some Wonder new.

Here they observe, what fertile Fields of Corn
The Kentish Hills luxuriously adorn:
Which this and that way mov'd by Zephirs Breath,
Vie in green Waves, with the salt Flood beneath.
There num'rous bleating Flocks o'er-spread the Plains,
Which still resound with loud, melodious Strains,
And Songs alternate of contending Swains.
Here lowing Herds the spacious Pastures graze,
Their Beauty much, their Numbers more amaze.
Some with their Milky Burdens over-flow'd,
In frothy Pails their bursting Dugs unload.
Some for Augusta's Feasts prepare their Chines,
Fill out their Points, and load with Fat their Loyns.

The forreign Lords the noble Stream admire,
Pleas'd both to see it flow, and to retire:
Which with alternate Kindness favour'd more
The Kentish now, and now the Essex Shore.
While in Meanders to the neighb'ring Main
The liquid Serpent drew its Silver Train,
Transported with the Wonders of the Tide,
And the delightful Banks, the Strangers cry'd,
Had but the Mantuan, whose unrivall'd Lays
Do high as Heav'n's expanded Concave raise
The rapid Tiber, and the ling'ring Po,
Once seen this sweet, this noble River flow,
His charming Lyre once more he would have strung,
And not have left, O Thames!  thy Flood unsung.

They yet did greater Admiration shew,
Greater Surprize, when first they had in view
The num'rous Ships, that lay on either side,
And saw the Boyant Groves at Anchor ride.
Where British Oaks, and high Norwegian Pines
Reer'd their contiguous Heads in thicker Lines,
Than when before they on the Mountains stood,
And throng'd each other in the shady Wood.
Smooth wat'ry Lawns, and Glades of open Air
Amidst the floating Forrest did appear,
Thro' which the Sailors did their Vessels steer.
Here high Augusta's Fleets did safely ride,
Contemn'd the Billows, and the Winds defy'd.

Here lay a Fleet with stormy Weather worn,
Foul with the Voyage, and her Rigging torn,
With Asia's Pride and Luxury opprest,
With Aegypt's Drugs, and Spices from the East;
With Persian Carpets, Silks from Smirna brought,
Dy'd in Sydonia, in Damascus wrought.
Pond'rous with Riches, glorious to behold,
Rare Silver Flowers, and interwoven Gold.
With Gems and Pearl, which India does bestow,
Where the fam'd Ganges, and Hydaspes flow.
There one had brought from fair Ausonia's Soil
Rich Tuscan Wines, and pure Calabrian Oil:
The noblest Velvets of Liguria's Store,
And beauteous Coursers from the adverse Moor.

Here rode a Fleet, that had th' Aequator crost,
And with advent'rous Sails gain'd Guinea's Coast;
Fill'd on the Sun-burnt Mauritanian's Shore
With Iv'ry Wealth, and heaps of Golden Oar.
Some, who had sail'd to cold Greenlandia's Coast,
By stormy Winds and foaming Billows tost,
'Midst floating Icy Mountains to assail
The Lord of all the frozen Seas, the Whale,
'Midst various Deaths and Fears, with wond'rous Toil,
Came laden back with the slain Tyrant's Spoil.
Some fraught with Cordage, Masts, and Naval Stores,
Came from Norwegia's, or from Swecia's Shores.
Some were with Lusitanian Riches fraught;
Some did unload their various Treasures brought
From the rich Islands on the Western Main;
Some Russian Furs, some Golden Fruit from Spain.
While thus King Phillip's Lords their Way pursu'd,
They both with Wonder and with Envy view'd
The Wealth and Pleasures brought to Albion's Isle,
The Labour and the Growth of every distant Soil.

And now the Lords to high Augusta came,
And own her Glory did exceed her Fame.
With great Magnificence and solemn State,
On noble Steeds they enter'd at her Gate.
Adorn'd with Gold, in Scarlet Cloth array'd,
Their num'rous Train a glorious Progress made.
Thro' Streets thick crowded with the gazing Throng,
And Shouts of publick Joy, they pass'd along.
They were conducted to Eliza's Court,
And entertain'd in such a Princely sort,
As well th' important Embassy became
Sent by a Monarch of so great a Name.

Soon as the Morn had with her soft grey Eyes
Look'd thro' the Windows of the Eastern Skies;
Th' Iberian Envoies from their Beds arose,
And for their Audience, did their Thoughts compose.
High on her Throne Britannia's Empress sate,
Whose bright, Majestick Looks eclips'd her State.
A Crimson Canopy stood o'er her Head,
The Floor beneath a Persian Carpet spread.
Behind her shone in high Embroid'ry rais'd
Britannia's Arms by all Spectators prais'd.
The Figures wond'rous, prominent, and bold,
Were Basse Relievs in Silver and in Gold.
High on her Forehead rose her platted Hair,
Whence Diamonds, beauteous as the Morning Star,
Diffus'd their twinckling Radiance thro' the Air.
To form a Heavenly Beauty on her Head,
A lovely Blew, conspicuous Saphers spread.
And Orient Pearl mild Lustre did display,
In Imitation of the Milky Way.

Illustrious Beauties, fair Britannia's Pride,
Dispers'd their confluent Rays from either side.
These various Orbs in shining Order plac'd
The Vortex govern'd by Eliza grac'd.
Mov'd by superiour Glory, did obey
Her central Majesty's Magnetick Sway.
Here mighty Vere's distinguish'd Consort shone,
Bright by Eliza's Beams, and by her own.
She did her Monarch's high Commands attend,
A faithful Subject, and a constant Friend.

The four bright Daughters of the valiant Vere
Did in their place not far remote appear.
This shining Constellation did support
The Throne of Love, and Pride of Beauty's Court.
Their Looks Seraphick Sweetness must acquire,
Where Female Grace and Martial Heat conspire,
The Mother's Softness, and the Father's Fire.
One with a Thousand artless Charms endu'd
A beauteous Star, tho' least in Magnitude,
More by Contraction bright, a Heav'n in little shew'd.
The four were worthy of so great a Lord,
Bright and Victorious, as their Father's Sword.
So many yielding Hearts their Eyes obey'd,
That they more Captives, than their Father made.

Here Pembroke did her envy'd Fame maintain,
And grac'd the Court, more than Arcadia's Plain.
There lovely Russel was by all admir'd,
Here the fair Comptons Eyes the Nobles fir'd.
The Sackvilles there did with their Charms invade,
And here the Grevilles silent Wounds convey'd.
There bright Oarda of a noble Line
By Birth and Beauty, did distinguish'd shine.

Great Numbers more of Albion's noblest Blood,
Richly adorn'd, around their Monarch stood.
The forreign Lords this Splendor did surprize
From radiant Gems, and far more radiant Eyes.
Confederate Glories, and promiscuous Light,
Did with immoderate Day, please and oppress their Sight.

Thus on her Throne the bright Eliza sate,
And crowding Lords on this and that side wait.
The Envoies did advance, but when they saw
Britannia's Queen, they felt unusual Aw.
They on th' august Appearance trembling gaz'd,
Were at the Glory of her Court amaz'd.
Dauntless Parmensis, who to Arms innur'd,
Had long the Sight of Camps and Courts endur'd,
Turn'd of his dazled Eyes, not wont to see
So great a Presence, so much Majesty.
Approaching near the Throne, the purple Priest
With this Harangue Britannia's Queen addrest.

Great Queen, our Monarch, zealous to maintain
Strict Peace between this Court, and that of Spain;
And proud to be esteem'd Eliza's Friend,
Gave his Command, we should your Court attend;
To make new Treaties, and confirm the past,
And settle Friendship, that may ever last.
He will his Faith inviolable plight,
That with his Arms he will defend your Right.
That he will War against your Foes proclaim,
And that your Friends and his, shall be the same.
His Ships are yours, and yours his Horse-men are;
His Chariots yours, when you engage in War.
He will before our Sacred Altars swear,
By all the Holy Myst'ries we revere,
By all that pious Christians love or fear;
His Navy shall not see the British Seas
Insult your Coasts, and interrupt your Peace.
He has a nobler Enterprize in view,
Another Course of Glory to pursue.
He to his Royal Promise will be just,
And to remove all Umbrage and Distrust,
He will renounce, and solemnly abjure
Rome's Absolution, and dispensing Pow'r.

I on the Sacred Oracles protest,
And on the Faith unblemish'd of a Priest,
That Spain's most potent Monarch seems to me
In this Affair from all Collusion free:
That he no stronger Passion can reveal,
No more sincere Concern, or warmer Zeal,
Than by a strict inviolable Tie,
To bind you as a Friend, and as a firm Ally.
Just Heav'n!  (to Heav'n I solemnly appeal,)
If I dissemble, or the Truth conceal,
Let Vengeance my devoted Head pursue,
Load me with Wrath, I ask it as my due.
He ceas'd.  Eliza rising from her Seat,
Did with her Guards, and noble Train retreat.
Th' Ambassadors, with customary State,
Were reconducted to their Palace Gate.
They were regal'd with great Magnificence,
And vast Profusion at the Queen's Expence.
Panting beneath the Weight, strong Servants bear
Prodigious Dishes of Britannick Fare:
Which by th' Intendant in long Order plac'd,
The groaning Tables both oppress'd and grac'd.
The tasteful Meats were with great Cost procur'd,
Which all the diff'rent Elements afford:
All which the Hunts-man takes in Hills or Woods,
The Fowler in the Fields, the Fisher in the Floods.
Here stood a Boar in brawny Collars; here
Haunches of Red, or Sides of Fallow Deer.
Here Sheep almost entire, and tender Fawns,
That spread the Hills, or sported on the Lawns,
Dispos'd with Art, did grace the Table more
Than they the Parks adorn'd, or Downs before.
The British Ox, a more delicious Cheer
Than Gallia's Partridge, or Ausonia's Deer,
In various Forms, by various Artists drest,
Pleas'd all the diff'rent Palates of the Guest.
In wond'rous Plenty, by the Queen's Command,
Whate'er was curious found by Sea or Land,
Where Winds can blow, or British Merchants sail,
Did Spain's astonish'd Embassy regale.

They had for Drink with their luxurious Cheer,
Strong, mantl'ing Ale, and old Autumnal Beer.
From Vaga's Banks rich Scudamoran Wine,
Scarcely exceeded by the forreign Vine.
They had the noble Liquors from abroad,
Which in her Ports Britannia's Fleets unload.
High Silver Flagons, Chalices of Gold
Fill'd to the brim, did Gallia's Pleasures hold.
Vast Goblets wrought with wond'rous Art, and crown'd
With rare Burgundian Nectar, went around.
They drank the flowing Riches of the Vine,
On Danaw's Banks, or on the rapid Rhine.
The Growth of Xeres, and the racy Spoils
Of the rich Grape press'd in the happy Isles.
First round the Board, then in their Veins, the Bowl
With purple Honours crown'd, did circulating rowl.
Here one with bright Champaign the Table plys,
Which sparkles in the Cup, but more within their Eyes.
One od'rous Hermitage profusely brings
Wine for thy Sons, O Rome, at least for Kings.
For tho' defrauded of the Son, the Vine
Does not Britannia Honour with its Wine.
Yet all her Ports with gen'rous Juice abound
From all the Kingdoms, and the Isles around:
She revels in the Growth of every Soil,
Enjoys their Vine, and drinks her Neighbours Toil.

Nor was there wanting Musick for the Ear,
Which gave the Wine more Life, most Taste the Cheer.
Fam'd Sons of Art, who did Augusta grace,
(Such Eccles is, and famous Purcell was.)
French cheerful Hautboys, sweet Italian Lutes,
Britannia's Viols, and soft sounding Flutes,
Rare Violins, and Voices most admir'd,
To form a noble Harmony, conspir'd:
Discordant Notes and Nations did agree
To charm the Guests with Heav'nly Melody.

Now had the Air three Revolutions seen,
And thrice to Shade, to Light thrice subject been.
When great Eliza did her Orders give,
Th' Iberian Lords her Answer should receive.
Then o'er her Treasure Cecil did preside,
And with Applause that envy'd Province guide.
A Peer of Temper, Wise, Sedate, Discreet,
Matur'd in Bus'ness, and of peircing Wit.
Envy in all his Conduct, sought in vain
To find a Blot, or in his Hands a Stain.
He still against all furious Bigots strove,
Who with such wild Praecipitation drove,
That they had set the Kingdom on a Flame,
(For of all Parties, Bigots are the same.)
Had not his mod'rate Councils stem'd the Tide,
It's Fury checkt, and made its Flood subside.
He from the Rules of Justice ne'er would swerve,
With Freedom close, and open with Reserve.
With equal Skill, instructed to reveal
Dark Statesmens Counsels, and his own conceal.

This Lord the Queen's Cheif Councellor of State,
With Philip's Envoies, manag'd the Debate:
And quickly finish'd this important Task,
The Spaniard yielding all the Queen did ask.
On either side the Solemn League was sign'd,
Nor could the Wit of Man Expression find,
That might Confed'rate Crowns more strictly bind.
Th' Ambassadors, their Treach'rous Business done,
Hasten'd their Preparations to be gone.
They did rich Presents from the Queen receive,
A gracious Audience had, and took their Leave.
Mean time Eliza did not wholly give
Credit to Spain, nor wholly disbelieve.
But tho' the Treaty had not quite supprest
The jealous Thoughts, that had her Mind possest,
Yet much their Oaths and Imprecations eas'd
Her doubtful Mind, and much her Pain appeas'd.
Such was her Goodness, she could ne'er believe,
That a Crown'd Head, with Purpose to deceive,
Would solemn Vows, and sacred Contracts make,
Which, whilst he made them, he design'd to break.
She never thought, that she should ever find
In Noble Blood, and in a Royal Mind,
Falsehood so black, and Malice so refin'd.
That as consummate Wickedness could dwell
In Monarchs Breasts, as that of Fiends in Hell.
While on this dreadful Guilt she did reflect,
She did King Philip's Honour less suspect:
Believing Kings would Perjury abhor,
Not dare affront the God, they did adore,
Deride his Justice, and defy his Pow'r.
Entangled thus in false Iberia's Snare,
With less Concern she did her Fleet prepare,
Cooler her Zeal, and slacker was her Care.
So far th' Atrocious, Irreligious Deed
Of Spain's Perfidious Monarch did succeed.

Above the Limits and Aetherial Mound
Which Nature's far extended Empire bound,
From empty Space unconscious of the Day,
Where ne'er Creation did its Pow'r display;
Th' Almighty's awful Throne on Pillars rais'd
Of independent, solid Glory, blaz'd.
On his Right Hand his uncreated Son
A Co-eternal Emanation shone:
Blissful Appearance of embody'd Light,
Where Human Nature and Divine unite.
Mysterious Ties the vital Union hold,
Which Seraphims adore, but never can unfold.
On Glory high enthron'd, in God-like State
The Christian World's Victorious Founder sate.
Him, as his Heir, th' Almighty Father own'd,
And with Dominion universal crown'd.
The spacious Seas, the Isles, and farthest Land,
Subject became to his supream Command.
He equal Laws dispences from his Throne,
His Subjects spares, and pulls Oppressors down.
With ling'ring Steps his halting Justice goes,
But from his Breast spontaneous Mercy flows.
His Vot'ries he protects with tender Care,
Supplies their Wants, and hears their humble Pray'r.
In their Defence he does in Arms appear,
And stops proud Tyrants in their mad Carreer.
He backward drives wild Persecution's Flood,
To save his Church, the Purchase of his Blood.

But how Transfigur'd from himself before,
When here on Earth he liv'd despis'd and poor?
A Crown of Glory now his Head adorns,
That here was mock'd and pain'd with one of Thorns.
The Face on which vile Miscreants Spit before,
Seraphs admire, and ravish'd Saints adore.
Twelve helpless Fisher-men did Honour show
To Heav'n's Commissioner, when here below,
Attendants on Distress, and Ministers of Woe.
Arch-Angels now compose his Royal State,
And round their King ten thousand Seraphs wait.
Fair Sons of Light, bright Off-spring of the Morn,
Attend his Person, and his Court adorn.
These shining Ministers surround his Throne,
Radiant as Stars, and dazling as the Sun.
The Body, which the painful Cross before,
Between two dying Malefactors bore,
Is now of stiffen'd, pond'rous Glory made,
Which Pain no more, no more shall Spears invade.
Now from his wounded Members, whence a Flood
Ran down the Cross of Meritorious Blood,
Uninterrupted Streams of Splendor flow,
Inlightning all th' Aetherial Space below.

He does with Care his Government attend,
And to and fro his swift-wing'd Envoys send.
To Potentates, Dominions, Heav'nly Thrones,
And Pow'rs distinguish'd by superiour Crowns,
Coelestial Chiefs, and Officers of State,
Who to observe his Nod, obsequious wait;
He does the Empire of the World divide,
Makes them o'er diff'rent Kingdoms to preside.
These, his bright Viceroys and Prorectors, go
To their respective Provinces below.
All whom the Great Redeemer does direct
His Church's Sacred Int'rest to protect.
To guard his Vot'rys, and his Vine-yard fence,
From secret Snares, and open Violence.
These to the Earth, or to their bless'd Abode,
Are always passing thro' th' Aetherial Road,
To execute their Charge, or to report
Their Expeditions at their Soveraign's Court.

Now mighty Gabriel, from Britannia's Coast
Arriv'd, and passing thro' the Heav'nly Host,
Became the foremost of the shining Crowd,
Which thronging round the Mediator stood;
And low before the Throne, the Great Arch-Angel bow'd.
Soon as he saw the Potentate appear,
The Great Redeemer on his Minister,
His watchful Prefect of Britannia's Isle,
Did with an Aspect Beatifick smile:
An Aspect that dispels all Woe and Care,
Sooths sad Distress, and solaces Despair:
The same with which he Martyrs does receive,
When thro' the Flames they first at Heav'n arrive.
Then thus he spake:  Our Minister, relate
What has befall'n reform'd Britannia's State.

The Seraph answer'd:  Albion's Pious Queen,
To whom Iberia has suspected been,
As purposing her Kingdom to invade,
Has with that Prince a firm Alliance made.
Ambassadors from Philip pass'd the Seas,
To fix with Albion, Terms of lasting Peace.
They did with Sacred Vows and Oaths, protest,
Castilian Arms should not her Coasts molest.
Their Imprecations, and th' Appeal they made
To this Tribunal, did the Queen perswade
With stricter Ties their Friendship to renew,
Thinking their solemn Protestations true.
Which has not wholly, yet has much dispell'd
The Thoughts, which in suspence Eliza held:
She finds her anxious Care is much allay'd,
And for Britannia's Realm, seems less afraid.

He ceas'd.  The bless'd Redeemer did reply,
Let not the Queen on Roman Faith rely.
She must no Weight on this Alliance lay,
Those who have me betray'd, will her betray.
Whilst Albion's Queen the Roman Yoke rejects,
And the Religion, which I taught, protects;
Let her not fruitless Expectations feed;
Will Spain from her invet'rate Hate recede?
Will ever Rome and Hell give Philip Rest,
'Till he reform'd Britannia does molest?
Will these pretended Christians, who disclaim
My pure Religion, yet profess my Name,
From bloody Persecutions ever cease,
Or let my faithful Vot'ries be at Peace?
When Ethiopians, to be White, begin,
And spotted Leopards shew a spotless Skin,
Then proud Iberia, and apostate Rome,
To me and mine will faithful Friends become.

Go, Britain's Viceroy, let Eliza know,
She trusts a broken Reed in Philip's Vow.
The faithless King her Goodness does abuse,
And with mock Treaties does her Court amuse,
While he his Hostile Purposes pursues.
Let her her Army and her Fleet prepare
To meet th' Iberian, and repel the War.
Lest by Surprize he should oppress the Queen,
And by perfidious Arms Britannia win.
Fly, Gabriel, fly, and with Angelick Speed
On this important Embassy proceed.

Th' obedient Seraph, this high Order giv'n,
From the Immortal Battlements of Heav'n,
Did with expanded Pinions wing his way,
Bright as the Morn, and swifter than its Ray.
Thro' th' Aetherial, trackless Firmament
He on his Province made a quick Descent.
'Twas then, when Albion's Just, Religious Queen,
Unheard by any, secret, and unseen,
To Heav'n her Morning Supplications made,
For her own House, for her dear People pray'd,
And thankful for the past, ask'd future Aid.
Uncommon Ardor did her Heart extend,
While she devoutly did with Heav'n contend.
A great Effusion of Coelestial Fire,
Did with a rapt'rous Zeal her Breast inspire.
In Anhelations of Seraphick Love,
In Pious Pangs of Extasy she strove
Blessings Divine, and Favours to procure,
And make propitious Heav'n's Protection sure.

Soon as the Queen from her Devotion rose,
And did her Thoughts for State-Affairs compose:
A sudden Glory, like the Virgin Day,
Dawn'd in the Place, and did mild Light display.
Odours Divine, ineffable Perfume,
Was suddenly diffus'd around the Room;
Such, as are breath'd from fresh Coelestial Bow'rs,
From bless'd Jonkyles, and Heav'nly Jes'mine Flow'rs.
Then dress'd in aeiry Garments to be seen,
Her Guardian Angel did approach the Queen.
With such a charming Mein he did appear,
With such mild Looks, as Love and Mercy wear.
Such had the bless'd Redeemer, when below,
He did Salvation on Mankind bestow,
And scatt'ring Light and Life did thro' Judea go.
His Neck and Hands were both Divinely fair,
And his long Robe, that hung neglecting Care,
Was white as Snow new-moulded in the Air.
Unfading Youth, a fresh Empyreal Red,
And blooming Honours on the Seraph spread.

Who thus began:  Hail, Pious Princess, Hail,
Your Arms on Earth, your Pray'rs in Heav'n prevail.
By high Command I come, to let you know,
You must not trust th' Iberian Monarch's Vow.
No Protestations, which he makes, believe,
Nor to his Oaths and Treaties, Credit give.
These are perfidious Charms design'd to keep
Your Senses shut, and lull your Court asleep.
The treach'rous King will from his Navy pour
His utmost Fury on Britannia's Shore.
Destruction he prepares, and from abroad
In Albion's Ports will heavy War unload.
Make haste, Eliza, to sustain the Blow,
Lest, you surpriz'd, too late your Error know.

He said.  And with a Heav'nly Mien withdrew,
The Pions Queen his Counsel did pursue.
She, to collect her Troops by Sea and Land,
To all her Chiefs and Gen'rals gave Command.
She wisely let her Loyal Subjects know
The black Intentions of the faithless Foe:
Who Peace pretended Albion's Court to blind,
That he the Realm might unprovided find.
This all her faithful Britons did enrage,
And made them for Revenge in Arms engage.
They flew with brave Impatience to the Coast,
Eager to Combate Spain's perfidious Host.
Thus both the Crowns for Conflict did prepare,
One to invade, one to repel the War.

Mean time, while these Transactions past between
Th' Iberian Monarch, and Britannia's Queen.
In Belgia, Vere, Eliza's General, led
Britannia's Cohorts to the Belgian's Aid.
Mauritius from the Camp, in which he lay,
Advanc'd, and met the Briton on the way.
With Marks of high Esteem, with Joy sincere,
The Belgian Prince embrac'd the Noble Vere.
Th' expected British Hero he receiv'd,
As one, by whose great Valour he believ'd,
Desponding Belgia's Fate would be retriev'd.
Vere in his turn the brave Nassau address'd,
The same Respect, and the same Joy express'd.
This done, Mauritius to his lofty Tent
With the Illustrious Welcome Briton went.
Where when arriv'd, the two great Heros send,
To their inferior Gen'rals to attend.

Mean time, his wond'ring Eyes the Briton turn'd
To the rich Arras, which the Room adorn'd.
He with surprizing Pleasure did behold
The lively Figures form'd in Silk and Gold:
With Flandria's Skill inimitable wrought
By fam'd Cartones from German Masters brought.
Rare Workmanship!  where Belgia's noble Loom
Was by the Pencil scarely overcome.
The unexampled Pieces did contain
The bloody Story of relentless Spain.

Here Alva sate in a high Chair of State,
A fiery Minister of Philip's Hate.
With cruel Deaths the Belgian he pursu'd,
In Plagues expert, and conversant in Blood.
Hatred, Revenge, Ambition, Falshood, Pride,
Infernal Malice, in his Look reside.
Assassins, Lictors, Headsmen, long in Pain
And Torment verss'd, an execrable Train,
Around him stood, expecting from his Hands
His cruel Orders, and his Dire Commands.
Of these, who did his Lust of Blood assist,
Each did receive a long Proscription List:
Which did the certain Fate of those contain,
Who then withstood the lawless Pow'r of Spain.
Who did outrageous Violence oppose,
And to defend their injur'd Country, rose,
And rather present Death, than ling'ring Ruin chose.
Some of thy Martyrs, Heav'nly Liberty!
Thy Glorious Confessors, were doom'd to die
In ling'ring Pains, with Engines to be rackt
Which Husband Life, and manag'd Death protract.
Some, to whom Alva did Compassion show,
Had leave to Die by one kind fatal Blow.
Some were condemn'd the Dagger's Point to feel,
Some the sharp Ax, and some the painful Wheel.
On which alive some broken lay, the most
Obtain'd the Favour to be strangled first.
Some of the Orders of this cruel Lord
Condemn'd whole Towns, and Cities to the Sword,
Whom to protect in Safety he before,
Perfidious Man!  in solemn Manner swore.

There Holy Fathers on Destruction bent,
And anxious, unknown Torments to invent,
Met at a pious Consult to support,
Their new erected Inquisition Court.
On their stern Brows dire Persecution sate,
Infernal Malice, and immortal Hate.
Intent on Blood, in Cruelty refin'd,
They Plagues decreed, and bloody Orders sign'd.
Their Dungeons there appear'd, Religious Schools,
Where Men are taught by expeditious Rules:
Where bloody Lictors Heav'nly Doctrines Preach,
Instruct with Engines, and with Torment teach.

Here cruel Instruments of Steel or Wood,
Of new invented Deaths, a vast Collection stood.
There lay in heaps, Hooks, Pincers, pond'rous Chains,
Plenty of curious Plagues, and choice converting Pains.
Here Martyrs dauntless from Almighty Aid,
Are thro' th' insulting Throng to Death convey'd.
Their Air compos'd, their Looks Divinely mild;
None seem'd afraid, and some with Pleasure smil'd.
They look'd with Pity on the mocking Crowd,
And seem'd to pray for those, who sought their Blood.
In other Figures did the Briton see
Triumphant Martyrs on the fatal Tree:
As did their Flames, so the bless'd Martyrs strove
To reach their Central Seat of Rest above.
They with Heroick Fortitude expire,
And mount to Heav'n in ruddy Cars of Fire.
Relentless Ruffians vent Infernal Rage,
They no Distinction make of Sex or Age.
Accurs'd Assassins Belgia's Race destroy,
Riot in Blood, and horrid Death enjoy.
Their Priests with Holy Murder never cloy'd,
Urge and intreat that more may be destroy'd.
They, that their Doctrines may Belief obtain,
Destructive Wonders show, and Miracles of Pain.
While Vere with deep Compassion mov'd, survey'd
This woven Tragedy, the Hero said,
To Arms how justly did the Belgians fly,
To check this monst'rous Rage, this barb'rous Cruelty?
How am I pleas'd the Brittish Youth to lead,
And bring th' afflicted States Eliza's Aid?
Their Enterprize is Glorious, who oppose
Their Arms to Heav'n's and Human Nature's Foes.

The Briton next with Admiration saw,
Wrought in another piece the Great Nassau;
The Glorious Founder of the Belgick State,
To whom Iberia bore Infernal Hate.
Whose Blood, Immortal Shame!  the Villain's Hand
Shed, by the Spanish Tyrant's curs'd Command.
To be distinguish'd, on a rising Ground,
His valiant Chiefs and Cohorts pour'd around,
Reform'd Batavia's Great Supporter stood;
His Gesture shew'd him speaking to the Crowd.
He to th' attentive Troops himself addrest,
One Hand extended, one upon his Breast.
With Vehemence, but with becoming Grace,
With all the Eloquence of Mein and Face,
He labour'd to excite their Martial Rage,
And make his Troops impatient to engage.
He propagates his Passion, and inspires
The Soldier's Bosom, and improves his Fires.
There wanted Words indeed, the only part
Which did exceed the Master's wond'rous Art:
And yet he seem'd so much to speak, that Vere
Admir'd that he no Voice, or Sound could hear.
The attentive Throng, that on the Gen'ral gaz'd,
Felt in their glowing Breasts their Courage rais'd.
Their bright'ning Eyes express their inward Fire,
The Foe they threaten, and the War require.
Viewing their Gen'ral they dismiss their Fears,
And let in Courage at their list'ning Ears.

Here the provincial Deputies conven'd
In Council, did the Wise Nassau attend.
They by their Looks and Gestures seem'd to plight
Their mutual Faith, to guard their mutual Right;
Their Freedom and Religion to maintain
Against th' enormous Violence of Spain.
The Great Nassau conspicuous did appear,
Did seem to speak, as they did seem to hear.
He look'd, as he their Courage did excite,
Conjur'd them for their Safety to unite,
Their Altars to defend, and save their civil Right.
They look'd determin'd, and resolv'd no more
To bear th' Iberian Yoke, or Roman Shrines adore.
By shaking Hands, and by a kind Embrace,
By all that can be known by Mein and Face,
They did in Vows and solemn Leagues engage,
By Arms to curb th' Iberian Tyrant's Rage.
That they their Blood would for their Country spend,
Assert their Altars, and their Rights defend.

Wrought in the Margin, to attentive Vere,
Emblems of Peace, and Union did appear.
Here a great Giant strove with Sweat and Pain,
To break a Sheaf of Arrows, but in vain.
Concord appear'd, wrought in another place,
Of wond'rous Strength, and beautiful of Face:
Which does in Wisdom, and in Force excel,
What Pagan Poets of their Pallas tell.
On one side Vict'ry, with a charming Grace,
Did on her Head a Crown of Laurel place.
Prolifick Plenty on the other side
Pour'd Golden Fruit around, and scatter'd flow'ry Pride.

Mean time, to this sublime Pavilion came
The Chiefs of highest Post, and greatest Fame:
To whom Mauritius, and the mighty Vere,
Their well-consider'd Purpose did declare,
Soon as the Morn should o'er the Night prevail,
Their Ensigns to advance, the Spaniard to assail,
While this Resolve the valiant Gen'rals hear,
All Marks of Pleasure in their Looks appear,
To the respective Posts they all repair;
Require the Day, and wait the promis'd War.
All Jealousy and Envy to remove,
And to maintain uninterrupted Love,
Noble Mauritius, and the valiant Vere,
The Pow'r and Honour did agree to share.
The Troops did each alternately obey,
And each, as Chief Commander, had his Day.

Unwilling yet to stand the Briton's Fire,
As he advanc'd, the Spaniard did retire.
At length he stood on famous Bruga's Plain,
Resolv'd th' invading Briton to sustain.
There he encamp'd on advantageous Ground,
And high Entrenchments did the Camp surround.
The British Army, full of Martial Rage,
Follow'd th' Iberian, eager to engage.
As swelling Billows on the Main appear,
A furious Tempest pressing hard their Reer,
When their embattled Legions march from far,
To storm some lofty Mould with liquid War;
Such an Appearance Vere's Brigades did make,
As they advanc'd th' Iberian to attack.
At the last Effort of expiring Day,
They reach'd the Camp, where Spain's Battallions lay.

Now, Muse, the mighty Hero's Names record,
Who to suppress the Belgian, drew the Sword.
Who to the War from distant Regions came,
Some with Church-Bigots to enrol their Name,
And some in hopes of Spoil, and some in quest of Fame.
Parmensis absent in Britannia's Land,
Mansfelt th' Iberian Army did command.
The valiant Warriour was of German Birth,
Skilful in Arms, and of applauded Worth.
Hara, whose Veins contain'd a Noble Flood
Of Spanish mixt with Lusitanian Blood;
Esteem'd for Conduct, Courage, Toil, and Force,
Was Chief Commander of the Spanish Horse.
Valdes, a Native of Asturia's Land,
Did next th' Iberian Cavalry command:
In Blood to Alva, more in haughty Pride,
In Falshood, Rage, and Cruelty, ally'd.

Varex, a Chief who Philip's Favour won,
Not by his brave, but cruel Wonders done.
Who less in Arms, than in Massacres skill'd,
Had Belgia's Land with Death and Carnage fill'd:
Who did the Guiltless and Unarm'd invade,
And violating Faith, rich Towns in Ashes laid;
Enroll'd and led in Arms the vig'rous Swains
From fair Granada's Hills, and Alcantara's Plains;
Where perjur'd Spain slew unbelieving Moors,
Or drove them from th' unhospitable Shores:
Expos'd them to the Seas, a dire Command,
Yet Seas less Cruel, than Iberia's Land.
They were to Waves, and Shelves, and Sands, resign'd,
To the Discretion left of every Wind;
Which sometimes growing calm, do Spain upbraid,
Whose undecaying Rage is ne'er allay'd.
Lavish and wastful of Infernal Hate,
Iberia never found her Stock abate.

From Mexico Alphonso lately came,
Where he had left the Tyrant's hateful Name.
And now the Chief did at the Altar vow,
That he no Mercy would to Belgia show.
India, Granada, Belgia, in their turn,
The dire Effects of Spanish Fury mourn.
These suff'ring Realms have been the bloody Stage
Of cruel Spain's inexorable Rage.
Noble Hernandes, of undaunted Heart,
A Man of Honour, and in Arms expert,
Who in the Siege of Metz did by a Ball,
A Musket sent it from the City Wall,
Loose his left Eye, but gain'd a mighty Name,
Among the Warriours of superiour Fame,
Brought his Battallions from the fruitful Land,
Which fair Sevilla's lofty Tow'rs command.
Perez, a Chief, in Martial Action bred,
To Belgia's Fields his valiant Cohorts led.
Arm'd with the Fauchion, and the glitt'ring Spear,
From the rich Banks of fam'd Guadalquevir.
Chimay, himself a Noble Belgian Lord,
Yet Belgia's Rights and Liberties abhor'd,
To serve the Spaniard's arbitrary Pow'r,
Did in the Host a high Command procure.
The fiery Bigot did in Arms appear,
Pleas'd to assist his Country's Ravisher.
A Malice which would all Belief exceed,
Did not Britannia now such Monsters breed.
Garcio, a Gen'ral brave, expert and bold,
Whose Name 'midst Spanish Heros is enroll'd,
Brought his stout Cohorts from the fertile Plain,
Where Noble Tagus draws her Crystal Train.

From high Toledo, once of wond'rous Fame
For temper'd Arms, her Lord Carrero came:
Whose impious Life Iberian Story fills
With Breach of Vows, and Forgery of Wills.
Velez, who still with Martial Honour fought,
His fierce Brigades from Salamanca brought:
Where Youth their Hours in idle Labour spend,
Rome's Pow'r and false Religion to defend.
Where Loyalites with grave and formal Look,
Teach Craft by Rule, and Politicks by Book.
Youthful Daranda, urg'd with sanguine Hopes
Of winning Laurels, led his valiant Troops
From fam'd Gibralta, whose high Tow'rs survey,
And guard the Entrance of th' Herculian Sea;
Which runs amidst the Land, and with its Tide,
Does the Iberian from the Moor divide.

They did besides, as Chief Commanders, own
Ibarra, Herman, Sanches, Barlamon,
Megen and Lara, Men of great Renown.
These mighty Chiefs the Battel did prepare,
And wait behind their Lines-approaching Vere.
Mean time his Flandrian Army to augment,
King Philip, anxious for the great Event,
Commanded Albert, Austria's Duke, to drain
The Towns and Forts of Italy and Spain,
And lead the assembled Troops to Belgia's Plain.

