The curfew-bell has rung; &mdash; retiring light,
Faint glimm'ring, verges tow'rd the western main;
Silent and slow ascends primaeval Night,
And o'er the world resumes her ancient reign.

Parent of mists!  in sable vestments clad,
Her drowsy brow with opiate poppies crown'd;
Her mantle dun enwraps the world in shade,
And universal darkness reigns around.

In the bright north, save where the meteors play;
By whose pale light uncertain objects seen,
With airy forms, and fancy'd shapes dismay
The coward rustic, plodding o'er the green.

That lonely path, yon ivy-crowned tower,
Where boding owls their nightly vigils keep;
The solemn silence of this awful hour,
Those monuments, where ancient worthies sleep;

O'er the lone church-yard while his footsteps tread,
Darkling, alone, increase the dismal gloom:
There lovely Mira rests among the dead,
Cut off in youth and beauty's opening bloom;

Mira, the fair, the lovely and the young,
By all the little loves and graces drest:
The pow'r of music sat upon her tongue,
And ev'ry virtue dwelt within her breast.

May Flora strew her treasures round thy tomb,
There may the rose in all its beauty glow;
In snowy pride, there may the lily bloom,
And mournful vi'lets, mark'd with notes of woe.

Thee, Mira, thee!  with ev'ry charm adorn'd,
I weep: &mdash; to thee is rear'd the marble bust.
Vain pageant!  worth like Mira's shall be mourn'd,
When sculptur'd marbles crumble into dust.

But, see what glories burst from yonder clouds,
Chequer'd with ruddy streams of op'ning light!
That sable curtain in its bosom shrouds
The silver Regent of the silent night.

Pleas'd with this solemn scene, I musing rove
O'er ways unknown, and paths untrod pursue;
Lost in the mazy wild, or shady grove,
While all elysium opens on my view;

Thee contemplation, daughter of the sky,
Whilst I invoke to leave the blest abodes!&mdash;
'Tis thine, on soaring wing, to lift on high
Th' enraptur'd soul, and place her with Gods.

Oh, haste thee maid!  and with thee bring along,
Wisdom, thy sister, heav'n descended fair;
"Smit with the love of solitude and sing,"
O may she to these lonely shades repair!

Not as of old, when from Olympus' height.
With terror-blazing arms, and Gorgon-shield,
She rush'd tremendous, thund'ring, to the fight,
And chas'd the giant-forces from the field;

But as she whilom deign'd in Ida's shade,
To bless the am'rous Phrygian's ravished sight;
With helm unbrac'd, with bosom all display'd,
Her blue eyes gleaming with coelestial light.

Oh may her spirit, with Appollo's fire,
Parent of verse!  to whom these strains belong,
Still deign to guide me, still my notes inspire,
Conduct my muse, and harmonize my song.
