I.
Within what fountain's craggy cell
Delights the Goddess Health to dwell?
Where from the rigid roof distills
Her richest stream, in steely rills?
What mineral gems entwine her humid locks?
Lo, sparkling high from potent springs
To Britain's sons her cup she brings!
Romantic Matlock!  are thy tufted rocks,
Thy fring'd declivities, the dim retreat
Where the coy Nymph has fix'd her fav'rite seat?
And hears, reclin'd along the thundering shore,
Indignant Darwent's desultory tide
His rugged channel rudely chide;
Darwent, whose shaggy wreath is stain'd with Danish gore!

II.
Or does she dress her Naiad cave
With coral-spoils from Neptune's wave,
And hold short revels with the train
Of Nymphs that tread the neigh'bring main?
And from the cliffs of Avon's cavern'd side,
Temper the balmy beverage pure,
That fraught with "drops of precious cure,"
Brings back to trembling Hope the drooping bride;
That in the virgin's cheek renews the rose,
And wraps the eye of Pain in quick repose!
While oft she climbs the mountain's shelving steeps,
And calls her votaries wan, to catch the gale
That breathes o'er Ashon's elmy vale,
And from the Cambrian hills the billowy Severn sweeps.

III.
Or broods the Nymph with watchful wing
O'er ancient Badon's mystic spring?
And speeds from its sulphureous source
The steamy torrent's secret course;
And fans th' eternal sparks of hidden fire,
In deep unfathom'd beds below
By Bladud's magic taught to glow,
Bladud, high theme of Fancy's gothic lyre!&mdash;
Or opes the healing Power her chosen fount
In the rich veins of Malvern's ample mount?
From whose tall ridge the noontide wanderer views
Pomona's purple realm, in April's pride,
Its blaze of bloom expanding wide,
And waving groves array'd in Flora's fairest hues.

IV.
Haunts she the scene, where Nature lowers
O'er Buxton's Heath in lingering showers?
Or loves she more, with sandal fleet,
In mattin dance the Nymphs to meet,
That on the flowery marge of Chelder play?
Who, boastful of the stately train,
That deign'd to grace this simple plain,
Late, with new pride, along his reedy way,
Bore to Sabrina wreaths of brighter hue,
And mark'd his pastoral urn with emblems new.&mdash;
Howe'er these streams ambrosial may detain
Thy steps, O genial Health, yet not alone,
Thy gifts, the Naiad-sisters own;
Thine too the briny flood, and Ocean's hoar domain.

V.
And lo!  amid the watery roar,
In Thetis' car she skims the shore,
Where Portland's brows, embattled high
With rocks, in rugged majesty
Frown o'er the billows, and the storm restrain,
She beckons Britain's scepter'd Pair
Her treasures of the deep to share!&mdash;
Hail then, on this glad morn, the mighty Main!
Which lends the boon divine of lengthen'd days
To Those who wear the noblest regal bays;
That mighty Main, which on it's conscious tide,
Their boundless commerce pours on every clime,
Their dauntless banner bears sublime;
Which wafts their pomp of war, and spreads their thunder wide!
