I. 1.
Wafted on many a fav'ring breeze,
What shouts of triumph greet the ear?
What distant shores, what wond'ring seas,
BRITANNIA'S awful thunders hear?
What Hero on her recreant foe
Inflicts the deepest, deadliest blow?
What VICTOR her extatic joy renews?
The joy of ev'ry heart &mdash; the theme of every Muse.

I. 2.
'Tis HE!  th' intrepid Chief, whose name,
Long known for high heroic deeds,
Now fills the loudest trump of Fame,
To Valour prompts, to Glory leads!
Distinguish'd o'er the martial train,
He nobly bled &mdash; nor bled in vain&mdash;
Bright Conquest her propitious flag unfurl'd
High on the burnish'd prow, to cheer th' Afflicted World.

I. 3.
Nor lust of Power, nor pride of vain applause
(That bright but unsubstantial crown)
Inspires her Sons to win renown,
Whene'er the righteous sword BRITANNIA draws.
To tame the proud, the vanquish'd spare,
Th' oppress'd from cruel wrongs to save,
These objects claim her gen'rous care,
These trophies best adorn the truly brave.
When fierce Tyrants widely spreading
Their baneful pow'r, bid ruin stalk around;
Oft her gentle mercy, shedding
It's sweet refreshing dews, has heal'd the deadly wound.

II. 1.
Thou mighty stream, whose secret source
Has mock'd the toil of many a sage,
Whose waters, from their sevenfold source,
Rush forth with wild tumultuous rage!
Though godlike Heroes on thy lands
Have rang'd their proud victorious bands,
Say, hast thou heard a fiercer combat roar?
Did e'er a nobler Chief adorn thy fabled shore?

II. 2.
Did juster Honours deck the crest
Of AMMON'S SON, when, crown'd with spoils,
On thy lov'd banks he deign'd to rest,
And paus'd awhile from Vict'ry's toils?
When mighty CAESAR, calmly brave
Stem'd with his breast th' opposing wave,
And, safe in valour, mock'd each hostile dart,
Say, did he then display a nobler, firmer heart?

II. 3.
Ah no! &mdash; Each darling Chief's aspiring mind
Was lur'd by false Ambition's charms,
The love of wide-destroying Arms,
The impious hope to subjugate Mankind.
Far juster crowns, more lasting praise,
BRITANNIA'S matchless Sons adorn;
A grateful World its voice shall raise
And bid their valour live to ages yet unborn;
Bid the Muse, with transport viewing
Our gen'rous Chiefs, the joyful notes prolong,
And, her favourite theme pursuing,
Record their glorious deeds, immortaliz'd in song.

III. 1.
For combat arm'd, the wary foe,
In well-rang'd order, firm array,
(Forewarn'd to meet th' impending blow)
In tow'ring strength, exulting, lay;
Vain confidence! &mdash; From AEGYPT'S shores
In vain t' associate thunder roars:
In vain her threat'ning rocks, her shoals, withstand
BRITAIN'S impetuous Sons, and guard the hostile band.

III. 2.
Collected in his native might,
Our dauntless Chief maintains his course,
Awhile forbears the promis'd fight,
Prepar'd to strike with tenfold force,
At length he strikes! &mdash; The deadly blow
Lays haughty Gallia's Honour low:
Pierc'd with wide wounds, or wrapt in hostile fires,
Each shatter'd vessel yields, or in a blaze expires!

III. 3.
Ye souls of Heroes, generous, just, and brave,
Through many an age to ev'ry shore
Who BRITAIN'S Naval Thunders bore,
And fix'd her Empire o'er the subject wave!
Oh!  with propitious smiles look down,
While, the glad Victor's brows to shade,
His Country weaves the noblest crown
The crown of modest worth, that ne'er shall fade.
From her heavenly throne descending,
Let Justice ratify the doom of Fame;
And let Glory, never ending,
With BRITAIN'S dearest Sons enrol her NELSON'S Name.
