To thee, who midst the festal Shades
Of laurel'd PINDUS lov'st to sport,
Where, circled by th' Aonian Maids,
The tuneful PHOEBUS holds his Court:

To thee my earliest Strains were sung,
No Wreaths as yet my Temple bind,
As yet my Lyre has ne'er been strung,
Tho' Dreams of Fancy fill'd my Mind.

STROPHE.
When lost to all her former fire,
Rome saw her letter'd Fame expire,
And GENIUS, once a Name belov'd,
Far from her pensive Groves remov'd,
Those Groves where Freedom often stray'd,
To court with thee the peaceful Shade;
But Freedom fled, couldst thou abide,
So nearly both by Fate ally'd!
For Britain's wild untutor'd Shore,
Where Nature only spread her Store,
Thou left'st the Land by Heaven resign'd
To Discord, Scourge of Human kind.
Old Ocean and the Nereids came
From their green Caves to hail thy Name,
While echoing to the Waters round,
The Tritons bade their Shells resound:
Our Isle, with Joy, beheld the Train,
That came to share thy blissful Reign;
Saw Ignorance with Faction bred,
Along in haughty Triumph led,
And Sloth, that seem'd to Shame to feel,
Dragg'd slow behind the Chariot-wheel:
Each Muse around did fill the Sky
With Strains of various Minstrelsy,
While Fame, who loves to grace thy Side,
Oft to her Mouth the Trump apply'd.

EPODE.
Not long o'er this much-favor'd Shore,
Had GENIUS own'd a lawful Sway,
Before, like bursting Rays, his Power
Shot thro' the dark'ling Clouds to Day:

Those Gothic Piles were yet rever'd,
In which the Vandal's Hand was known,
And baseless Structures yet appear'd,
By Zeal and Madness rais'd alone:

These to destroy, and every Mind
To free from Error's misty Reign,
Thy Pity, GENIUS, first design'd,
And first unloos'd the shameful Chain.

To equal those fair Athens bred,
Renown'd for Science, Arts, and Wit,
And those, who o'er Ausonia spread
That Fame which Time can ne'er remit:

He bade 'mongst Britain's artless Race,
The Muse her fav'rite Son inspire;
And soon behold, with various Grace,
Each youthful Bard attempts the Lyre:

The hoary Druids hymn'd no more
In silent Gloom their mystic Lay,
Their Harps the War-stain'd EDWARD tore,
Far from their mourning Groves away.

ANTISTROPHE.
But, GENIUS, see the sportive Bard,
Who thine and Fancy's Power has shar'd,
To simple Swains, the Woods among,
Fierce Wars and faithful Loves, he sung;
Around him airy Shapes are seen,
Led by their little Magic Queen,
While, ever dwelling on his Strain,
The Graces join the mirthful Train.
He 'twas who first thy Lessons taught,
And breath'd the wildly-pleasing Thought.
And see, where plac'd in aweful State,
While subject Passions round him wait,
That Bard, whom thou and Heaven design'd
The lasting Pride of Human kind:
Oh ever could my constant Lay
To his sweet Shrine a Tribute pay;
Him Nature form'd her darling Boy,
And bade him all her Force employ
To raise the Soul, and mend the Heart,
And Grief and Joy by Turns impart.
Her Likeness oft, so wondrous true
His heaven-directed Pencil drew,
That Men who saw the Work so fair,
Believ'd the Goddess self was there.
In earliest Times, whatever Breast
Thy sacred Spirit e'er possest,
On none were such bright Gifts bestow'd,
For none like SHAKESPEAR'S Bosom glow'd.

Oh GENIUS, where would end the Strain,
Should I recount thy favor'd Train,
To each th' indebted Homage pay,
On whom thy Beams were wont to play?
But grant me Power divine to feel
That Spirit thou canst still reveal,
And I, tho' yet unknown to Fame,
May hail in worthier Lays thy Name.
