See Term appears to rule a passive world,
And awe the frighted rustick with its train
Of Wigs, and Gowns, and Bands.  The jemmy Clerk
Close by his Master's side stands powder'd, while
His Client at a distance cringes.  Now,
Thou dear Associate of my busy hours,
Whom, (since Vacation in her sleepy lap
Lull'd me to indolence, Circaean Queen,
Who poison's while she smiles) I have disdain'd,
Thy presence let me hail. &mdash; I greet thee well.
Now will I lead thee through the Maze of Law,
Perplexing and perplex'd.  The knotty point,
And ev'ry quirk and quibble will I shew:
And sometimes on huge folios shalt thou tread
With black-brow'd lections hideous.  There, intent
The puzzling clause shalt thou transcribe, until
Thy pilot sickens.  Strait he shall revive,
And speed thy flight to equitable shores.
There shalt thou penetrate each deep recess,
And labour'd labyrinth of a Bill in Cant,
Daring to face tautology.  How thick
Thy stream will run, respondent to each note
Of dull interrogations? &mdash; Quickly thence,
As time may prompt, and active fancy flow;
Thy font I'll purify, and turn its course
O'er fairy mountains, and poetic vales.
Say!  hadst thou rather the Demurrer's bar
Erect invincible, than waft my sighs
To my Cythera's bosom, and direct
Her eyes, those lamps of beauty, where to shine.
When Cupid's messenger, how dost thou fly,
Swifter almost than thought; and as I touch,
In honour of my love, the Sapphic lyre,
Methinks thy feather dances to the tune.
But when I bid thee up the heavy hill,
Where bus'ness sits, to travel, how thy pace
Wants quick'ning!  this, and that way dost thou writhe,
Convolv'd, uneasy with the tiresome march.
Hold up awhile &mdash; for sure is the reward
That waits on labour. &mdash; Bear, oh!  bear me then
Thro' long succeeding Covenants, from sense
However devious.  Spread thy black'ning cloud
O'er this fair face of parchment.  Haste &mdash; Dispatch
This cumbrous load of things.  On quicker, on,
And rid me of the bus'ness of the Term.
Then in reward for all thy service past
(Tho' gratitude be held a crime) thy plume
With gold shall blazon.  Safe in a silver case
Shalt thou recline, from vulgar ken remote,
Nor ever visit more the Sons of Care,
Unless to win respect, and be admir'd.
