Provok'd with Poetry, I daily see,
Of Method, Nature, Truth, and Manners free,
Where little Sense is thro' whole Pages spun,
And the dull Verse in duller Numbers run;
Whence glaring Ignorance, with Pride combin'd,
Betray the Weakness of each Author's Mind;
Such monstrous Things my Satire dare expose,
Tho' Poets, Wits, and Critics rise her Foes.
Resolv'd to punish where the Fault is just,
Praise where she ought, and pity where she must;
To mend the Taste of this degen'rate Age,
And on the Mob of Scribblers point her rage:
Dauntless proceed &mdash; Ye Foes to Sense draw near,
And you, her Friends, lend your impartial Ear.

Let Fools for Lucre found the tuneful String;
'Tis all for Glory and for Fame I sing;
Fond of the Art, I will protect its Cause,
Maintain its Virtues, and defend its Laws;
Scourge the vain Foes who shall its Ends prophane,
And save it from Destruction and Disdain.

All grant true Poetry's an Art divine,
And blest is he who in the Art can shine;
To soar above the Height of vulgar Fame,
And be rewarded, with a Poet's Name!
But few there are who labour to excel;
All modern Poetry this Truth can tell.
The Lust of Lucre fills the Place of Praise,
And Crowns of Gold exceed all Crowns of Bays.

Of all God's Creatures, sure vain Man alone
Is to himself the least, and slightest known;
Proud of his Parts, and mighty with Conceit,
Mistakes his Talents thro' a vain Deceit;
Prompted by Weakness, or inspir'd by Fame,
He grasps at Glory, but embraces Shame.
To prove this Truth needs no great Art of Wit;
Read thou the Poems that are daily writ.
See Men that might in other Arts have shin'd,
Grow Fools in Verse, and hateful to Mankind;
To be ridiculous they labour hard,
And in Despight of Heav'n abuse the Bard.
Their Verses prove how they mistake their Parts,
Design'd by Nature for inferior Arts.
What Satire can on those be too severe?
They aim at Wit, when Folly is their Sphere.
No Creature quits its Element but Man,
At all he grasps within his narrow Span.

Among the Pieces publish'd in these Days,
There's not a Poem we can truly praise;
In few the Sparks of Genius can be found,
And fewer still the Taste or Wit abound;
But dull, insipid, nerveless, and obscene,
With language wretched, vile, impure, and mean.
Can I such horrid Trash with Patience read,
Nor pour my Fury at each Scribbler's Head?

"But why thus anxious to correct the Age?
Thy Satire will be vain, as is thy Rage.
Did they regard the mighty Pen of Pope?
And if he fail'd, can you Success e'er hope?
Cease, cease, my Friend!  the endless Task give o'er;
Such Scribblers make true Poets shine the more;
Like Stars that twinkle from their distant Spheres,
But lose their Glory when the Sun appears."

Thy Caution, NASSAU, I confess, is wise;
But must I privately such Works despise?
When Taste and Wit are seen no more to shine,
And Truth is banish'd from each Breast but THINE;
When Sense and Virtue fail to meet Applause,
Can I be dumb, and not assert their Cause?
Where is the Danger to expose such Men?
Their only Weapon is a trifling Pen:
Let them, alas!  employ that Weapon well,
I'll sing their Praises, and their Virtues tell;
But while 'tis us'd to mangle Sense in Rhime,
To torture Patience, and to murder Time,
Is not my Satire just?  Can I offend?
The Good, the Wise, and Gen'rous will commend.

Forbear, rash Men!  some other Art abuse;
Poetry is sacred, so is the Muse:
Think not a Verse, tho' logically wrought,
Can make you Poets, or be Poets thought;
Tho' great your Learning, and your Theme divine,
'Tis Taste, ye Vain!  must make the Poet shine.

No little Rhimer in these modern Days,
But thinks his Nothings claim immortal Praise;
Will his melodious Trifles sweet pour forth,
And wonder in himself at their vast Worth!
If in Description he can make a Rhime,
He calls his Genius great, his Wit sublime!
For puzzling Thoughts he studies to surprise,
And vainly dreams the World believes him wise:
Hard Dictionary-Words shall next advance,
To cheat the Fool, and hide his Ignorance;
Pleas'd with his self-conceited Parts, he vows
Parnassian Laurels shou'd adorn his Brows;
Condemns the Public for his slighted Fame,
When all his Works his Merits loud proclaim.

Many are these, in Verse, who court Renown,
But prove the Jest and Scandal of the Town.
Blind to their Faults, and partial to their Rhimes,
They boast of Beauties, and reproach the Times;
Shall dare to call great Chesterfield an Ass,
In letting such bright Talents heedless pass.
Think'st thou he'll Patronize your Verses mean?
The Star must shine, thou Fool!  that wou'd be seen.

The Man who labours for a deathless Praise,
By flowing Numbers and poetic Lays,
Must first a just and proper Taste attain;
For without Taste your Poetry is vain.

What Author can expect in Verse to shine,
Who feels no Raptures at a Golden line?
Dull and laborious he spins out his Thoughts,
Alike insensible to Praise or Faults!
If Concord, Rhime, or Numbers he can write,
The rest he judges good, and must delight;
From all true Taste your half-wit Poet flies,
As Light's avoided by distemper'd Eyes.

Words obsolete and rude some shall revive;
For Spencer's Taste industriously they strive:
Whole Poems in his Stile are daily writ,
Where antique Truths are taught in modern Wit.
Such uncouth Numbers ill adapt these Times;
For Taste is too refin'd to like such Rhimes,
They were esteem'd, I grant, in Spencer's Days,
And justly claim from us immortal Praise:
But now old Words to use gives just Offence;
For they corrupt our Language, Taste, and Sense.

Some too must imitate great Milton's Stile,
Tho' weak their Genius, and tho' vain their Toil;
At his sublime and lofty Sense they aim,
See, ***, how heavy, flat, and dull;
Your mimic Poet is a trifling Fool.

If you must write, and have a Knack to rhime,
Embrace some Subject worthy of your Time;
Your Genius, Strength, and Taste examine well:
That Task perform'd, proceed with Caution on,
(For much is to be lost, and little won)
Let Nature dictate, and let Taste refine,
And by the Test of Judgment prove each Line.
Be easy, delicate, concise, and plain,
Tho' free, sublime; tho' learned, yet not vain:
Your Words well plac'd, and with right Judgment chose,
Are certain Rules which true sublime compose.

There are, who, thro' a vain Poetic Rage,
With Rant and Fustian swell their frantic Page;
Whose Thoughts are Riddles, and whose Sense is Sound;
Truth they obscure, and Nature they confound.
Such lofty Nothings, NASSAU, you despise;
'Tis pompous Ignorance to judging Eyes!
Make all thy Language to thy Subject fit,
For what's most natural is most like Wit.
A clear Idea, perfectly exprest,
To bear the strongest Marks of Truth confest;
Whose Sense and Beauty Proofs sublime impress,
And most Expressive in the plainest Dress.
Be not too diffident, nor yet too vain,
Read and correct, correct and read again;
Adhere to Precepts that the Wise impart,
And get each Rule of Poetry by Heart.
Let all you publish be compleatly writ,
To shine a very Master-piece of Wit.
These Rules preserv'd, and by the Muse inspir'd,
Thy Works can never fail to be admir'd;
A Poet's Name is not with Ease attain'd,
By Pains and Labour Glory must be gain'd.

Out from your Work each trifling Error strike,
The smallest Faults are apt to raise Dislike:
As well-wrought Pieces give the noblest Joys,
So 'tis a Luxury that never cloys.

What made immortal Pope distinguish'd shine?
Truths well explain'd, and Sentiments divine.
POPE!  sacred Bard!  in all thy Works we find
The copious Wisdom of thy mighty Mind!
Strong and harmonious are thy Numbers writ,
Fraught with good Sense, and arm'd with solid Wit:
Correct, yet free, concise, yet not obscure;
In Judgment happy, and in Language pure.
Whose ev'ry Thought with Strength of Virtue shines,
And Truths immortal beam in all his Lines.

Do'st thou a Poet's deathless Name desire?
For Wisdom, Glory, and for Fame aspire?
Make Pope thy Guide, thy Teacher, and thy Plan;
I like the Poet, but I hate the Man.

In ADDISON'S instructive Page we find
The purest Elegance to Learning join'd;
Who taught with Judgment, and with Spirit writ;
Whose sense was Nature, and whose Talent Wit:
Chaste in Expression, in Ideas clear;
Tho' modest, bold; tho' tender, yet severe:
Whose Precepts artfully attract our Youth,
And steal them into Virtue, Sense, and Truth.

Accept, O sacred Shade!  accept this Praise,
From one who honours and adore thy Lays.
To thee alone I consecrate my Time,
Explore new Truths, and study Arts sublime:
Fair Virtue still bemoans her Patron dead,
Yet she shall flourish while thy Works are read.

For Humour justly SWIFT may claim the Bays,
And he rewarded with eternal Praise;
His Wit is poignant, copious, and severe,
His Language nervous, masterly, and clear:
But who can like his Satire or his Pride?
He bares those Faults which Nature bids to hide:
With gross Ideas he degrades each Thought;
The Want of Decency is his great Fault.

Nor shall immortal YOUNG neglected lie,
While I can sing, his Praise shall never die.
Harmonious Bard!  to Virtue ever dear;
Sublime in Wisdom, and to Truth severe!
To what Perfection are his Poems wrought!
What Strength of Stile!  What Energy of Thought!
Who reads his Satires on the Love of Fame,
But feels the Raptures of his sacred Flame?
So just to Life each Character is drawn,
We see our Pictures, and our Foibles own.
At Folly and at Vice he points the Dart,
While Truth and Manners guide it to the Heart:
Mercy with all his Strokes for ever fall,
And Pity beams a Glory round them all;
Nor Scorn, nor Hate, nor Pride disgrace his Lines,
But pure Good-nature thro' the Sat'rist shines.

Some laugh at Vice; a Satire, in my Mind,
(With all Submission) dang'rous in its Kind:
On Fools or Knaves alike such Satire's lost,
They're pleas'd to make you smile, tho' at their Cost.
All Satire ever shou'd adapt the Deed,
Your Wit then takes Effect, and you succeed:
To laugh is to encourage, not destroy,
They see your Mirth, and judge they give you Joy.
Your monstrous Crimes for boldest Satires call,
Arm'd with sharp Wit, and mix'd with bitt'rest Gall;
At Foibles sneer, at Vice severely frown;
The Fool reproach, but knock the Villain down:
Bare deep his Crimes, dissect him till he bleeds;
Probe to the Quick, and shew his foulest Deeds.

All modern Satire to Abuse is grown,
Condemning Men with Vices not their own;
Who think the Business of their Theme's to bite,
And maul Mankind thro' Madness or thro' Spite:
On Good or Bad, to them 'tis all the same;
For, Sportsmen like, whate'er they meet is Game:
The Fool, the Wise, the Virtuous, and the Knave,
The Villain shameless, and the Hero brave,
Meet the same Fate; nor Sex, nor Age they spare,
But all alike their Frowns and Censure share.
For base Reward, some brand an honest Fame
With deepest Crimes of Guilt, and blackest Shame.
Curst be the Wretch who prostitutes his Pen,
To blast the Characters of virt'ous Men;
May such be doom'd to endless Care and Pain,
And, like their base Rewarders, meet Disdain.

There are who in a Title place their Wit,
Who reads are balk'd, who purchase are bit;
The Cheat will shine in Spite of the Disguise;
Fools may with such be caught, but not the Wise:
Pleas'd with the Fraud, they hold it no Offence,
And plainly prove they wanted but your Pence.

How Pastorals, tho' vain, still glut the Town!
The very best are far beneath thy Frown;
All what they say amounts to just no more
Than what ten Thousand Thousand said before:
Condemn'd, and justly, to the Grocer's Hands,
To be transported into foreign Lands.

Who can but smile to hear their Nymphs complain,
And Shepherds singing of Despair and Pain!
One tells his Friend the Suff'rings of his Heart
Arose from Beauty, and from Cupid's Dart;
But the Fair Wanton treats him with Disdain,
And 'tis his Fate to love, but love in vain.
Another, in as wretched Verse, declares
What griping Pangs of Jealousy he bears!
Now proves his Mistress perjur'd in her Love,
And now more faithful than the truest Dove;
Describes his Nature rash, suspicious, mad;
And all is pitiful, and all is sad!

Two Shepherds next are introduc'd to sing,
One likes the Summer best, and one the Spring;
Both matchless in the Art of piping well,
A Prize is stak'd for him who shall excell:
A Third is call'd the Wager to decide,
Now Eloquence is heard in all its Pride;
Descriptions, Riddles, Puns, and Similies,
In wild Confusion and Disorder rise!
While the vain Author thinks he greatly shines,
And in alternate Verse applauds his Lines.

Defend us, PHOEBUS!  from each trifling Bard;
Thy fav'rite Land with Wisdom still reward!
Aid thou her Sons who for Protection call,
Make them write better, or not write at all.

All Poetry in Truth is now abus'd,
For vilest Ends the sacred Art is us'd!
Few write with Judgment, and as few with Sense;
Where One can please, a Hundred give Offence.

"Point out the Men; Thy Satire strikes at All."
The List now follows; mark them as They fall.

See *** who in Ink will dabble still,
And says a Nation's Fate demands the Quill!
Fond of his Trash he styles himself the Wise;
Some few affirm, but Numbers more despise.
No nervous Lines his languid Diction Grace,
Far-fetch'd Conceits rise up in ev'ry Place,
No Wit to charm, no soothing Numbers roll,
Nor Thoughts sublime to touch the rapt'rous Soul.

With what Obscurity does Puzzle write!
He labours to perplex us, not delight;
So hard to find his Meaning out, you'd swear
Nor Sense nor Reason, Wit nor Nature there;
In Pompous Words, his Truth, with Art are wrought,
But lost in Riddles and the Maze of Thought!
I hate the Work that is not clear and plain,
And deem the Author Ignorant, or Vain.

Pedantus with Quotations fills his Page,
Provoking justly an indignant Rage.
No Language spoke in Europe but he quotes,
And all the Work is cramm'd with idle Notes.
Whoever reads are sure to be perplex'd
With countless References intermix'd;
When such Pedantic Pieces meet my Eyes,
I loath the Purport, and the Man despise.
It speaks as if the Author meant to shew
His mighty Reading, and his Learning too!
Quotations needless are but idle Arts,
To make the Vulgar wonder at their Parts.

With Nurtur'd Rules, PROLIXUS charms the Age,
And senseless Precepts croud his lenghten'd Page.
Who can with Patience, tho' a Dunce of Prose,
Read the long Lines of his long Thoughts ill-chose;
How old his Stile!  How poor the Whole is writ!
A Heap of Words without one Grain of Wit.

ORLANDO has some Wit, but not refin'd;
And wants sound Judgment to improve his Mind:
He seems to labour, not to write with Ease,
And such Performances can never please.

Wit, is a dang'rous Tool to play withal,
If Judgment does not guide, you surely fall;
It will at best your Weakness much expose,
And leave you naked to the scourge of Foes.
Ye rash conceited Wits believe the Rule;
A Fool in Print will ever shine a Fool.

Your Fancy may beyond your Judgment soar,
And strike out Beauties that were ne'er before,
But that, Orlando, seldom comes to pass;
You rise a Monster, and conclude an Ass.

How pleas'd is SCAURUS when he writes a Song?
His Numbers hobbling, and his Judgment wrong;
Yet in his Eye, he cries, 'tis very fine!
And vows no Poetry is so Divine.
His Learning's little, and in Genius dull,
A Rhyming Blockhead, and Poetic Fool.
With too much Foppery to make a Wit,
And Pride disdaining never to submit.
Swell'd with Conceit to that enormous Size,
He deems himself the Wisest of the Wise.

Conceit is Error's Parent got by Pride,
Nurs'd up in Flatt'ry, and to Vice ally'd,
A Bard to Wisdom, and to Truth a Foe,
(Who boast to know all Things, yet nothing Know)
An Object hated, and a Being curst,
For Fools conceited are of Fools the worst.

In England let some Bard, ye Pow'rs!  arise,
Sublime as Plato, and like Homer, wise;
To fire Mankind with Actions truly brave,
Revive lost Arts, and sinking Virtue save,
Make Science flourish, banish'd Truth restore,
Sing like the Swain, and like the Eagle, soar;
Let deathless Paeans hail the happy Bard,
And Immortality be his Reward.

Others, there are, who shall for Critics pass,
Proclaim this Man a Fool, and that an Ass,
Shall ev'ry Work without a Reason damn,
Because they know perhaps, or hate the Man.

I from my Soul do hate when Fools pretend
To censure Things, which they can never mend;
But with an Air, and to be reckon'd Wise,
Will hum Applause, or artless Criticise.
What Raptures when a little Fault is found!
No Miser values more a Thousand Pound.
The Whole without Exception then is damn'd,
By All discarded, and by All confirm'd.

Sometimes an Error they pretend to find,
When to their Shame the Error's in their Mind,
Nothing, tho' Perfect, can escape their Rage,
This Thought is wrong, and that suits not the Age,
It has no Similies, or void of Rule,
Your little Critic is a MIGHTY FOOL.

I love the Man who will my Errors show;
How can I mend unless my Faults I know?
Let Fools be anger'd at a Judge sincere,
My Task is to submit, and to revere.
The Man of Sense, when wrong, will set me right;
My Friend may flatter, knowing 'tis polite.
But thank my Stars!  I have the Wit to know
If I deserve the Praise, which they bestow;
Can see the Arts vile Flatterers may use,
For Flattery's to me a gross Abuse.

An Honest Praise all worthy Men desire,
Praise spurs us on, and sets our Souls on Fire;
It gives an Edge to all the Heroe's Toils,
Who bleeds with Pride to crush his Country's Broils;
It soothes the Tyrant, and it fires the Bard,
It is of all good Deeds the sweet Reward.

Good Deeds, like Poems, few are worthy Praise;
Pride, Ignorance, and Vice fill up our Days;
While Virtue, Learning, Merit, Sense, and Wit,
Must yield to Villains, and to Fools submit.
Strike, Satire!  strike; and make them feel thy Rage;
With Knaves and Fools eternal War I'll wage.

"When will this Fury and this raving cease?
No more &mdash; be Wise &mdash; 'tis Time to be at Peace.
Those very Men you Fools and Scribblers call,
Are Poets deem'd, and Poets prais'd by All;
Your Satire will at best but gain you Foes,
Perhaps yet worse &mdash; Thy mighty Self expose.
Mend thy own Faults; how incorrect!  how dull!
For love of Verse you too commence a Fool.
To graver Themes thy growing Genius fit,
You'd shine in Morals where you fail in Wit.
If they write ill, must you too do the same?"
Let them who make me do so, bear the Blame.

Great Faults I have, and not a few, I own;
"Why publish then?"  Because, I wou'd be known.
Ambitious to atchieve a Poet's Name,
And rank with Authors of Immortal Fame;
Blest by the Muse, with Sense of Glory fir'd,
Anxious to please, and by the God inspir'd,
I rush for Praise: &mdash; "Beware, rash YOUTH!  Beware!
The Paths of Glory you must tread with Care.
A World of Mortals urge that Height to gain,
And labour up the steep Ascent with Pain.
How few succeed let Observation teach;
He sure must fall who soars beyond his Reach.
Heroes themselves thro' many Dangers run,
Before the envy'd Prize be safely won:
With strictest Care the slipp'ry Ways explore;
If once you fall, you fall, to rise no more.

"In Days of Yore when Britons writ in Prose,
And not a Verse for Centuries arose,
Had you, alas!  been born in those blest Days,
And writ this Piece, it might have gain'd some Praise;
But now, a different Fate thy Lays attend;
For Pope once read, who can thy Lines commend?"

Your Thoughts are Just.  But I like other Men,
To show my Parts, must trifle with my Pen;
Yet know, I am not He so vain and proud,
To think what e're I write, it must be good.
Conscious of my Weakness (which credit Sir,
I'm not asham'd to even here aver,)
To proper Men I fly for frank Advice;
Some give it freely, and some give it nice.
Some praise, some blame, some neither &mdash; save a sneer;
You are of All, to me, the most sincere.
With Care you read, with Candour you correct,
Explore my Errors, and my Faults detect,
Strict to my Sense, and tender of my Fame,
You praise with Judgment, and with Judgment blame.
Wise without Pride, and without Rapture, warm;
And blest with ev'ry Faculty to charm.
Impartially you censure  and commend,
A Gen'rous Critic in a Faithful Friend.

I too my Verses read with nicest Care,
Dissect my Errors, and my Weakness bare,
Free from self-love, the Whole, I strict explore;
The crabbedst Critic, sure, can do no more.
I blot, I add, I alter, and refine,
And weight the solid Substance of each Line.
That my Design is Just, ev'n Foes must own,
And for Defects of Wit let that attone.

"A pretty Plea to foil the Critic's Rage,
And Poets too will in their Cause engage."
Not they, poor Souls!  Their wanted Wit will own,
'Tis far beneath a Censure or a Frown.
Their Judgments ask'd?  It is not worth a damn;
And if they knew, O!  how they'd maul the Man!
I scribble not to bribe a Partial Praise,
My sole Ambition is the Wise to please.

Let me be honour'd in succeeding Days,
For sacred Precepts, and for virtuous Lays,
Immortal PHOEBUS!  It is all I ask;
And grant me Wisdom for the GODLIKE TASK.
If e'er I vary from these Glorious Rules,
O!  rank me, Heaven!  with the meanest Fools.
