STROPHE.
Oh thou that canst with Ease controul
The Sallies of the free-born Soul,
Canst humble proud Ambition's Claim
To Grandeur, Wealth, and noisy Fame,
And bid the swelling Passion laid,
No more the Walks of Life invade:
Fair Freedom's Son, whose lenient Sway
Adoring Mortals pleas'd obey,
While Fancy to my ravish'd Eye
Presents thy friendly Deity,
Oh let a Spark of Theban Fire
Thy humble Votary inspire,
To tell the golden Bliss they share,
Who live protected by thy Care.

EPODE.
Now while the rosy Light of dawning Youth
Begins the various Paths of Life to shew,
Where lie direct th' unwinding Ways of Truth,
The Hills of Happiness, and Vales of Woe:

Those Velvet Paths, that to th' alluring Bowers
Of sleepy Indolence and Quiet lead,
Where softest Music lulls the listless Hours,
And crimson Poppies strew the Wanderer's Bed;

And those whereup the sweating Trav'ler moils,
The Steps of Perseverance, labouring sore,
Where oft, like Sisyphus, he back recoils,
And loses many a Step he gain'd before.

Whether by Prudence fairest Precepts led,
Or urg'd by Genius, I those Walks pursue,
That ope to active public Scenes; or tread
Those less frequented, less expos'd to view;

Do thou, Dispenser of sincerest Bliss,
Nurse in my Breast those Sparks of heavenly Fire,
That all my End and Aim alone be this&mdash;
To act unbiass'd, or unaw'd retire.

ANTISTROPHE.
Ah why shouldst thou thy Gifts deny
To Sons of Verse and Harmony,
Thou chear'st alone the drooping Muse,
And canst sublimest Strains infuse
Into the high-enraptur'd Soul
Of Genius, spurning all Controul:
Ah why didst thou, unkind, disdain
To loose that fetter'd Bard, whose Strain
Flow'd strong and clear with Sense's Stream,
Reflecting Fancy's golden Beam,
Whose Lay, old Thames his Head would rear
Above the whisp'ring Reeds to hear,
And from the Coral Caves, the Sound
Would call the watry Nymphs around:
Such Magic had his tuneful Shell,
He might have charm'd the Dog of Hell,
And back from foul Avernus led,
Another of the dread Dead,
But a worse Fiend to charm had he,
The ruthless Maiden, Poverty,
Who oft those kindly Fires suppress'd,
That glow'd within the Poet's Breast:
By some lorn Stream, on grassy Pillow,
His Harp suspended on a Willow,
Reclin'd and pensive would he be,
And oft prefer his Prayer to thee:
Still was the Boon withheld by Fate,
Still curs'd he liv'd  beneath the Great.
Nor he alone of all th' inspir'd
Remain'd neglected tho' admir'd:
Behold another tuneful Wight,
Whose Fancy form'd the wondrous Knight,
A mirthful Bard of comic Fame,
(The Muse must smile at BUTLER'S Name:)
Oh may we all his Zeal defend,
Who strove his Country's Faults to mend,
For him as well the Laurel grows,
As him who quells a Nation's Foes;
To Patriots is the Wreath decreed&mdash;
Not less the Bard's than Victor's Meed.
Yet tho' he saw on Albion's Shore,
When civil Discord rag'd no more,
A State o'erwhelm'd, and prostrate lie
In all the Tide of Luxury,
And tho' a listless Monarch lov'd
The Verse, that all Mankind approv'd,
His ever adverse Stars denied
Life's smallest Wants to be supplied.

But ah!  how blest that equal State,
That scorns the Smiles and Frowns of Fate:
Unenvying sees the Wretch that goes
O'er sad Siberia's Waste of Snows,
And him who ploughs the billowy Main,
In dreary Travel after Gain;
Him too who digs with ceaseless Toil
Near Ganges Wave, the Indian Soil,
In Search of Nature's Wealth below,
The Diamond's Glare, the Ruby's Glow.

I ask but this, nor this refuse
Fair Freedom's Son, to court the Muse
In some unseen sequester'd Vale,
Where no unruly Passions dwell;
There oft when careless, blythe and free,
I'll sing an artless Strain to thee.
