The Western Hills are ting'd with golden Hue,
Th' inspiring Breeze now fans the budding Tree;
The Fair depart the beauteous Scene to view,
And leave the Room to Solitude and me.

No Sound of Arms, no wild contending Throng,
Disturb the Peace of this sequester'd Shore;
Some sylvan Warbler pours her Ev'ning Song,
And Wharfe his soothing melancholy Roar.

Some Nymph now lays the fav'rite Needle by,
And leaves domestic sedentary Care;
To rear the blooming Flow'rs of varied Dye,
And mix their Sweetness with the rural Air.

Some silent Angler, bending o'er the Flood,
Insnares the scaly Tribe devoid of Fear:
All Nature smiles; and ev'ry vocal Wood,
Exulting, hails the renovating Year.

But what is Man, for whom these Beauties shine,
The Landscape blooms, the feather'd Warblers sing?
Does human Gratitude the Chorus join?
Does Love rekindle at the Blaze of Spring?

Perhaps to this frequented Place has stray'd,
Some Bosom glowing with the Love of Fame;
Hands that the Stores of Nature have display'd,
And rais'd a Patriot's or a Poet's Name.

But some, neglecting Truth's instructive Page,
Disdain to yield to Virtue's sweet Controul;
While vain Pursuits their captive Minds engage,
And Folly spreads her Empire o'er the Soul.

Yet o'er these verdant Meads full many a Breast
Has join'd, symphonious, with the grateful Theme;
Full many a Thought in purest Moral drest,
O'er Nature's Face has cast a brighter Beam.

For who, to blind Ingratitude a Prey,
Beholds the Bounties that around him flow;
Inhales the Breeze, or views the chearing Ray,
Nor feels his Heart with Admiration glow?

For thee, who musing, dost in Numbers free,
And artless Words, thy pensive Thoughts relate;
If Chance, when social Converse joins with Tea,
Some sympathetic Friend enquire thy Fate;

Haply some powder'd Belle may smile and say,
"When Seven was sounded from yon neigh'bring Spire,
Oft have we heard him take his winding Way,
To warm his Fingers at the Kitchen Fire.

"Then, on the downy Seat of yonder Chaise,
That rears its bright reflecting Lamps so high,
Oft would he loll in the meridian Blaze,
And pore upon the Crowd that passes by.

"Now through this Court, with fix'd unmeaning Eye,
And melancholy caution, he would move;
Now, gazing on the Fire, he stole a Sigh,
Like one oppress'd with Care, or cross'd in Love.

"One Morn I heard no Footsteps on the Stairs,
Within the Chaise no Eye his Form could see;
Another came; nor yet at Morning Pray'rs,
Nor up the Court, nor at the Fire was he.

"The next, we knew that at a neighb'ring Vill,
In quest of Health he sipp'd the limpid Spring;
Yet oft his Mind would wander hither still,
As each fair Scene return'd on Mem'ry's Wing.

"In this calm Round his Days were pass'd of late,
While Nature lay in chilling Shows array'd;
And if you seek to know his present State,
Read here the Meditation which he made."

Here rests his Head, in Scenes of social Mirth,
A Youth to Fortune and to Fame unknown:
Herculean Vigour smil'd not on his Birth,
But pallid Languor mark'd him for her own.

Long did the Town his tender Frame defend,
Now rural Scenes the vernal Hours beguile;
How blest his Lot!  each Want beholds a Friend,
Each Care, a Cousin's and a Sister's Smile.

No more let airy Dreams his Mind elate,
Nor dark Despair oppress the anxious Breast;
In "trembling Hope" he wishes still to wait,
And grateful say, Whatever is, is best.
