SIR,
Let that good morning constantly be blest
With Sol's bright beams superior to the rest;
Let warbling birds melodious notes display,
To usher in that ever-glorious day;
And let that day with chearful mirth be crown'd,
Let the bowl sparkle, and the glass go round,
In which kind Heav'n to thee a being gave,
The best and dearest friend a man can have:
Still may thy fate be as thy honour clear,
And let new joys attend each added year.

From earliest youth our kind affection grew,
Which we reciprocal, each year, renew;
Through all vicissitudes, both worst and best,
It has remain'd, and bore the strictest test:
Our gentle Sires, with pleasure, oft survey'd
The progress we in mutual friendship made;
Firm to each other, we have still maintain'd
Its virtues spotless, and its rites unstain'd.

One kind Preceptor, whom we still admire,
Alternate fann'd in each the gen'rous fire;
Immortal RICHARDSON, in science skill'd,
Words sweet as honey from his mouth distill'd;
From him the Classic Lit'rature we got,
Whatever Rome or Athens taught;
The sugar sentences of Tully's tongue,
And all that Homer, Maro, Flaccus sung:
Oh much-lov'd man, what language can I find
To sing th' extent of thy capacious mind!

Releas'd from study, often we've retir'd
To Eden's banks, and the fam'd stream admir'd.
Whose chrystal waters in meanders flow,
Diffusing Peace and Plenty as they go;
Whose limpid verge the flow'ry meads adorn,
And fruitful vallies crown'd with golden corn:
Here rugged rocks in pointed columns rise,
Which fill the soul with terror and surprize;
There clamb'ring up, the inscriptions we've survey'd,
And wond'ring view the mighty things they've done
Between the rising and the setting sun;
To whose brave feats, and memorable deeds,
A base, degen'rate progeny succeeds.

With pleasure oft o'er Dacre's lawns we've stray'd,
And view'd the changes mold'ring time has made;
Close to whose confines grows a neigh'bring wood,
Near which a town and stately castle stood;
Whose Chieftain, for his loyalty renown'd,
The dire effects of civil fury found.
Struck with compassion, weeping, we descry
Its spacious tow'rs in piles of ruins lie:
One still remains a monument of shame,
And lasting stain to Cromwell's hateful name.
What times were these, my friend, when England saw
Her pow'r enslav'd by Puritanic law!
A Royal Martyr humbled to the block,
For Ipse dixits, by this frantick flock;
A worthless, raving, Oliverian brood,
Their impious hands in princely blood imbu'd;
A virtuous Prince, whom Heav'n had sure design'd
To grace a sceptre, and to bless mankind.
Thank Heav'n, we were not in that aera born;
These curs'd Republicans we hate and scorn.
We mind not what these Fanatics declare,
Our words and thoughts are diff'rent far from their's;
We'll leave these canting hypocrites to pray,
And sooth their malice with a Calve's-Head Day;
Whilst you and I, o'er flowing bumpers sing,
And chearful say, God save our noble King.

Immortal beauties in my mind arise,
And the gay prospect still distinguish'd lies,
When recollecting the unnumber'd hours,
Spent with delight in Naworth's shady bow'r;
Plac'd on the margin of fair Irdin's stream,
Homer and Virgil were the constant theme.
A tribute to great Hector's fame we've paid,
And mourn'd the downfal of the Tyrian maid,
While stern Achilles unlamented lies;
The god-like Patriot's glory never dies.

But when we turn'd from ancient Bards to those,
Who in our mother tongue to glory rose;
Old Chaucer foremost in the list we found,
His songs with never-fading laurels crown'd;
His laurels flourish still, tho' mould'ring time
Has marr'd the beauties of his doggrel rhime;
Yet strokes of wit and humour here and there,
Like sun beams breaking from a cloud appear.

Majestic Milton lays a nobler claim,
His numbers equal to his lofty theme.
Immortal Bard, what language can inspire,
To sing the beauties of that heavenly lyre;
To sing Jehovah girt with endless day,
And Heav'n's dread Host embattled in array;
The vast Creation of the World to tell,
And deeply search the dark profound of Hell.
Thro' Gay we've pass'd, and Spencer's moral song,
Pope, Swift, and Dryden, Oldham, Cowley, Young.

Soon as the Sun th' autumnal solstice clos'd,
And Winter's dreary aspect interpos'd,
The sounding gun or hunting spear we take,
Visit the stream, or beat the bushy break;
Then shoot the cock, the teal, or pheasant gay,
Or teach the springing dog to yield his prey:
When home return'd, the languid spirits cheer,
With wholesome food, and good old English beer;
The various actions of the day relate,
And drink and sing a catch of merry Kate.
Such sports we lov'd, untainted with those crimes
That cast a gloom upon our modern times;
Nor like those wretches who to increate their store,
Heap bags on bags, and still sit pining poor.
With frugal care such pastimes we enjoy'd,
Nor were our hours with empty pleasures cloy'd.

But yet, perhaps, it may be deem'd a crime,
That I should trouble your repose with rhime,
Yet maugre every fear, my humble Muse
Hopes you this slender tribute won't refuse;
For 'tis but just, that I turn should write,
What my heart dictates, and my head indites.
No luke-warm medium our affections know,
Free from the soul our ardent wishes flow;
When gen'rous acts of gratitude inspire,
We scorn to invoke one spark of Delphic fire.

May'st thou, dear friend, have many years to come,
And plenty crown thy hospitable dome;
Still may thy hours with pleasure glide away,
And years unnumber'd seem a summer's day;
And rest assur'd, I am with wishes fervent,
Dear Sir, your most obedient humble servant.
