What gleam is this, which thro' my tatter'd wall
Appears?  'Tis morn, the wretch's hour of care.
Instant from bed of clotted flocks I start
Ill-rested, (such will nature's wants compel)
To roam in quest of family supplies
With weary steps:  city or suburbs wide
Anxious for children indigent at home,
And wife in child-bed durance, perilous time,
When my fell genius, Disappointment nam'd,
(Adverse to bards!)  threw luckless in my way
The baffling debtor and loan-shifting friend.
What must I do?  with aggravated pain
Some-whiles I wander where the banker's gold,
Pil'd ostentatious, lies to mock the eye
Of needy passenger.  So hung in hell
The guileful fruit near hungry Tantalus,
Prohibited his touch.  Sometimes I halt,
Lur'd by a dark recess, in private there
Sad thoughts to feed, or close-pent griefs to vent
In urine; or unbend my passive mind,
Amusive, where the letter'd stall affords
Relief enchanting, while with transient glance
I ken promiscuous authors, prose or rhime.
Such is my wont, depriv'd of bard or sage
By hard penurious fate, my mind to store
From academic bulk with authors rare.
So study'd those, renown'd, from walking nam'd
Peripatetick, and their antient school.
Mean time the pelf-expecting bibliopole
Hateful to pennyless reader, scouting views
His pupil, and with unrelenting hands
From pond'ring student oft th' unfinished page
Rends unsuspected:  horribly abash'd,
Picqu'd with chagrene I brook the vandal's rage,
And quit full soon th' inhospitable soil.

Now noon, in form of dinner, sensual baits
To appetite suggests; diffusing rare
Of cooks or tavern kitchens grateful fume,
From savory roast meat, or collation boil'd,
Still heighten'd, from the reeking pasty borne
By the coarse 'prentice, or trim liv'ry page,
Grievous to hungry nostrils. &mdash; Where?  ah!  say,
Say, muses, where shall needy poet dine?
From the still door of guttling citizen
No invitation sounds, nor glutton hall
Of vulture butcher, gorg'd with precious spoils.
Uneas'd I rove, save, what by times, affords
In warbled verse, the Syren of the street
From some throng'd corner, till my footsteps reach
The court's safe-fostring verge, and happy park,
Fam'd for camelion food of wholesome air,
There, with the spruce beau, lac'd and pennyless,
Or the rook'd gamester, or lean starvling wit,
I sauntering range; and pick my foodless teeth,
Where gobbling ducks present, regretful view;
Or on some bench at ease, supinely loll'd,
Chew hot mundungus, or Scotch snuff exhale,
Or sport my fancy on the yielding sand
By scrawling traces from my wanton cane,
Diverting cares; till tortur'd bowels roar
Themselves to rest, and drops the western sun.

See!  night, in show'rs disguis'd of drizling rain,
All comfortless ascends.  To chase her glooms
Swift down the shelt'ring passage I betake
Of a known hospitable roof, yclipp'd
A boozing ken:  There, near the chearful fire
Harbour'd, I waft my consolating pipe,
And (witness to the scenes of vulgar mirth,
Calm'd with philosophy) in patience tiff
Old porter, or regale on Cestrian cheese,
Till the hoarse watchman, clamorous at the gate,
Gives signals to depart:  in sighs I leave
My vacant mugg, with friendly caution scor'd,
All unobserv'd, behind th' unnotic'd door,
And bedward, ruminating, urg'd with speed,
Roam darkling; whether now, the broad high street
With coaches rattling, or long winding lane,
I traverse, or dark alley intricate,
Still cautious of the bailiff's watchful eye,
When lo!  what mean the fates?  my stumbling steps
Deep thundring through the sable shades, alarm
Two ill-star'd lovers; on nocturnal rites
Engag'd in lawless ties.  The trembling wight
(Whether demented for horrid crimes
By vengeful heaven, or to the destin'd spot
Led for my succour by all-pitying Jove,
Or thought of dread discovery, sore appall'd,
Conscious of counter-fees and foul disgrace,
Whate'er the secret cause)
Me, rash mistaking for th' abhorrent form
Of constable, or watchman sent on spoil,
Hurry'd by Fears, with eager pressure fix'd
In my unwitting hand a golden spell;
Such as enamour'd Jove on Danae rain'd,
Sure bribe for guilt, long since by mortals nam'd
A splendid guinea.  Ye amazing Gods!
What does the lamp present my startled sight?
Incredible!  again I doubt, and stop;
Again the light confirms my fluttering hopes:
A splendid guinea! &mdash; O ye bounteous powers!
How large your favours shower'd!  how timely sent
All unexpected! &mdash; homeward, pleas'd, I haste,
Chaunting loud paeans; there, receiv'd with love,
Wants fled my mind, sweet sleep my eye-lids seal'd,
And cakes and butter blest my morning cheer.
