To paint in verse descriptive half the charms
Of those enchanting beauties that adorn
A Country Barber's Shop, demands the touch
Of elevated Bard; such as can boast
Diversity of though, whose brain prolifick,
Replete with poignant strokes satyrical,
To pen commits its vivifying pow'r.
Creating as it runs:  Thus have I seen,
Transported seen, in Lloyd's admired sheet!
The aukward theme deserving scarce a name,
Equip'd in metaphoric stile, approach
Sublimity! &mdash; How then can I presume!
I!  who by scribbling curse of late display'd
A woful proof of inability,
In Tooth-ach's jagged lines!  again attempt
Fool-hardy, to ascend that treach'rous mount
Whose base presents a horrid list of those
Who, quitting sense, make here their wretched exit,
Unnotic'd. &mdash; Thus the greedy Merchant steers
By former wrecks, or adverse stars, undaunted,
Encount'ring fate; again he braves the storms,
In hopes success at last may crown his toils
And balance disappointments. &mdash; So I've found
In vain my efforts to deserve applause,
Or t' escape the rock of nonsense!  Still I feel
Again revive the self-enamour'd joy
Commencing Writers kindles! &mdash; Now behold!
Elate the ensign'd chief obliquely rears
Its tessellated trunk:  nor creaking sign,
Nor perriwig suspending rudely, dare
Approaching incommode its site majestic!
Conscious of self-sufficiency it scorns
To hold connection with a penthouse vile,
On whose e'er verdant brow and round its sides
In paint cretaceous honest Ned declares
His willing mind, to powder, cut, and trim;
Nor asks but single penny for his fee!

Now shifting thought admittance claims, and here!
O!  for immortal Hogarth's gift! &mdash; vain wish!
But could my pen attract the ling'ring eyes
Of wonder-seeking wand'rers, how they'd feast!
Might glut, and feast again:  Not such the pomp
Of Coronation shew, or City's train,
Where Taste in splendour sickens:  Here, methinks,
Gay Humour's combating with Penury
(In spleen-diverting conflict) half subdu'd:
Whose jocund presence let me hail! &mdash; again!
Once more &mdash; I doff respectful! &mdash; Whether high perch'd
On cieling's blazon'd height its friendly found
'Twixt bunch of sage and missletoe's fam'd shrub
For many a season hung, the suppliant line
Artful convolv'd, or whether from side to side
Its influence extends, alike its use
Benign, which nightly to the full-trim'd fount
Of highest favour'd fluid, which can boast
Supplying light from darkness, yields support.&mdash;

Here, spurn'd from Court and Pride, Arachne's art
Inimitable, safe asylum finds;
Witness those num'rous waving canopies,
Whose symmetry, and wond'rous fabrick, speak
An  Architect divine!  In busy strife
There view the nimble artist wantonly
Forming its silken streamers &mdash; now retreat&mdash;
Now sportive climb the slender filament
Of clue corporeal &mdash; Here hang in pompous state
The treble-border'd urns impregnable,
In which sire, grandsire, generations long
Have slept securely &mdash; Now descend my eye
Reluctant, to behold the warlike ken
Of pasteboard tribes, in order militant,
On shelf enticing rang'd; for here, lest Void
Or Scarcity should shew her ghastly front,
The gladsome Ceres spreads her choicest store
Of viands delicate, whether of pastry built,
With divers species pregnant; roast or boil'd
Alike their fragrant charms the envy raise
Of Hunger's wishful eye &mdash; There effigies,
With births and parentage, and fam'd exploits
Of heroes long since wept! &mdash; The margin'd vase
Next claims respectful note, diff'ring in rank
Far from the vulgar herd of metal harsh!
Of Stafford's matchless sons conspicuous here
With Asia's produce vies; the ruddy mass,
Magnificently burnish'd, equal serves
To uses multifarious &mdash; Now bedew'd
In Lather's Alpine wave, not seldom deem'd
Fit bulwark to defend from oven's scorch
The Pudding's golden vest; but chief thy worth
Inestimable held when smiling Kate
To nameless use consigns thee! &mdash; Yet unsung
The Mirrour's 'lause remains, whose radiant orb
Long vainly struggled with the tyrant hand
Of fell Mischance!  By many an honest wound
In Truth's defence, to form polygonal
Its star-like glare's confin'd; Diminish'd not
Thy peerless excellence!  Encircled oft
With intertwisted wreaths of knotted curls
Meand'ring down thy front, in bo-peep mood
Thou dart'st thy beams refulgent!  How caress'd!
By sturdy son of toil!  who weekly courts
Thy undissembling presence; as with care
He platts the Sunday grizzle, pleas'd, surveys
His smug deport!  in silent joy confess'd.

Struck by that phyz of consequence, I trace
The glimpse of reason's embryo in thee,
Thou ape of human visage!  Wooden block!
What lineage may'st thou boast!  Of centuries growth
The star-tipp'd oak for thee was taught to feel
The axe's keen resentment; else thy form
Had ages past by sons of violence
Chaotic rudeness known.  With prongs obtuse
The vengeful trident from thy Pericrane,
How oft has met repulse!  Whilst placid thou
In visibility art seen present,
To wrinkled time a challenge! &mdash; Thou hallow'd seat,
For charms like thine description's impotent,
Or gratitude had plac'd thee at the head
Of this eye-piercing round:  Thy genial shrine,
Like Phalaris' Bull, with patriotick warmth,
Thy votarist's breast inspires!  Begirt with thee
In glowing accent, how the lab'ring hind
(In politicks deep vers'd!) mellifluent pours
To P&mdash; th' exhaustless incense of his heart!
While gaping plow-mates 'bibe the magic din,
With nod assenting, 'wail their country's doom
And sigh for P&mdash;, or Peace! &mdash;  But to describe
Minutely each delighting object, found
In this capacious haunt, (in whose just praise
Whole volumes might be fill'd) to abler bards
I will it &mdash; Whilst to school I bend my flight.
