Happy the man, the Cobler, or the Bard,
Who knows not Wealth's inchantment, but whose soul
Sublime, above the sublunary joys
Of idle splendor, casts a retrospect
Upon itself, not of itself ashamed;
In true substantial Poverty elate,
Elate, triumphant, while the selfish rich
Mourn inward, and themselves with horror view,
Caricatura dread! &mdash; so Doll, at home,
(If Simile to poor man be allow'd)
Within the broken fragment of a glass,
Which once adorn'd the chamber of some Lord,
Survey's her healthy face, with Nature's paint
Best-colour'd, and approving, sees display'd,
Or thinks she sees, some secret charms, deny'd
To Phillis in her Cardinal or Shade,
While batter'd Phillis, in the mirror, views,
Tho' deck'd with gilded frame, her morning face
Broken, and disconcerted as her mind.

Hail Poverty!  connected, if thou deign
To share my homely bed, domestic spouse!
To dress my dish, with Hunger's sauce serv'd up
On wooden trencher, in its true Caveer.
No Ketchup I demand, nor Pickle green,
For, whetted on the stone of Poverty,
My appetite is keener than my knife.
Full oft my knife deserts me, when 'tis blunt,
Calling the grind-stone to its aid, while I,
Impatient grown with hunger, throw aside
The useless friend, deserting me in need.

But let not vicious POVERTY presume
To climb my garret, with contagious haunt;
I hate the Pest prophane, and keep her off&mdash;
White ermin I, in milk of chastity
Preserv'd, and nitid as the bleached down
That germinates upon the neck of lambs.

Dwell vice with opulence and sordid gold,
Tann'd as that basest metal of the mines.
My coat of arms be argent, and my crest
The Lily, vaunting in its foliage pure,
Said to excell the pride of Solomon,
Tho' clad in all the purple of the East.
"Simplex munditiis" shall my Motto be,
Writ with the ink of snow, and pen of swan.

Far be the blood of grape from my plain cup,
Of chrystal be my glass, with limpid stream
Replete, of cleanly river, or of spring
Not fabulous, like that of Helicon,
Or Hippocrene, by ancient Poets sung;
But real, apt to slake a Poet's thirst;
Nor mineral, like that of Bath, or Spa,
Oft prostituted to the worst abuse,
And feign'd restorative of wan decay.

They only, in the stream of wealth who swim,
Are truly poor, and literally mean;
Vapid to them is ev'ry joy of life,
For sweet Necessity, with kind salute,
Ne'er drew their curtains at the mattin's dawn
To say, good-morrow &mdash; Come, thou buxom lass!
Jocund and blithe, who daily windest up
The weights of life, and bidst our clock to strike
Each wheeling hour upon the bell of Time,
Each silver minute, counted o'er with bliss,
Because enjoy'd, the poor man's certain bank,
Never to break, till Time itself be lost.
Appreciate to its value, who can rate
Of Times the standard sum?  Ye Suicides
Who kill a Mint of hours, oh weigh the guilt
Of but one slaughter'd second, basely slain,
Which not the Chemist's best hermetic seal
Can bind, or bid it not evaporate,
Tho' e'er so artfully transfus'd; oh think
Upon the forfeit ne'er to be redeem'd.

Let Poverty then estimate my hours,
Which, if enjoy'd, tho' fleeting, were my own,
Were mine possess'd, and like so many brides,
Wedded and woo'd, the rich survivor I,
Enrich'd by such Polygamy, alive
To woo and wed ten thousand thousand more.
Not so, if chain'd to wealth, Prometheus like,
By luxury corroded, liver-grown,
For ever wasting, and as fast supply'd,
From wants creating want, like Hydra-heads
Cut off, and still revegetating new.
