Soon as the nimble Handmaid Hours
Emerging from their Twilight Bow'rs
The fair Aurora have divinely drest;
Ere yet the radiant Lord of Day,
Chasing the humid Clouds away,
With heav'nly Glow hath flush'd the pale-fac'd East;
Oh!  Rose-lip'd Virgin!  are thy Footsteps seen,
Both on the Mountain Slope, and on the level Green.

What Time within the Maze of Sleep
The Drones of life their Senses steep,
Whilst Dreams oppressive o'er their Fancies ride,
Thou join'st the merry random Dance
With Exercise and Temperance:
That the gay Groom, and this the happy Bride.
These are thy Parents, and from such as these
Did Britain's hardy Race spring up in ancient Days.

Queen of each Grace!  sweet-featur'd Maid!
Without thy gen'rous constant Aid
Love's frisky Land in vain doth Beauty tread.
No genuine, fond Adorer dies
Beneath her brilliant &mdash; killing Eyes;
For all their Lustre, all their Fire is fled:
Nor can the Fair One long the Loss survive,
Till Thou her Charms restore, and keep those Charms alive.

Oh Fav'rite of the human Race!
What certain quick Events take Place,
Dispensive gracious Boon when thou art nigh!
Sickness, unpillowing his Head,
Starts up alertly from his Bed,
And looks around him with a joyful Eye;
Whilst Grief, who, like a Skeleton appears,
Blithe from his thin-worn Cheek wipes off the scalding Tears.

At thy Salute, thy friendly Touch,
The enfeebled Mortal o'er his Crutch
No longer bends, but stands erect at length;
Sudden he feels with dear Surprize
Each Fibre stretch, each Muscle rise,
And looks the Figure of elastic Strength.
Wielding his Club, Alcides-like, he goes,
Surveys his brawny Limbs, and scarce himself he knows.

Ah!  when shall I thy Blessings share?
When wilt thou give thy vital Air
To fan the dying Embers of my Soul?
When shall I join, when once again
Join thy jocose &mdash; thy ruddy Train,
And quaff with Decency thy sober Bowl?
View me with Pity, and thy Pow'r diffuse,
Rebrace my flaccid Nerves, and chear my languid Muse.

Since in thy Primrose-Path I've been,
The pranked Spring hath pass'd unseen,
Nor left one little Flow'r to feast my Eye:
And that brown beauty, who the horn
Of Plenty fills with Golden Corn,
In trim Straw-Hat hath trip'd regardless by;
Pomona too her ample Store display'd,
Since through thy sylvan Walks of Paradise I stray'd.

And twice hath Winter, Foe severe
To the soft Sunshine of the Year,
Disclos'd his horrid Scenery of Woe;
Twice from the rude, the chilling North,
The hoary Sire hath sallied forth,
Bending beneath a Magazine of Snow;
Then, whilst the Whirl-winds rag'd at his Command,
Shook the vast Burthen off, and roll'd it through the Land.

Once more, propitious Health!  once more
My feeble Frame to Strength restore,
Nor let me fall a Victim to Despair.
Alas!  I fear my troubled Mind
Is lost, and rambles unconfin'd;
Else why to Thee should I prefer my Pray'r?
GREAT GOD OF MERCIES!  Thou alone canst save
My weak, my sinking Soul, and wrest me from the Grave.
