Here plastic son of Nature, play thy part,
And call forth all the wonders of thy art;
In every line be deepest judgment shewn,
And figure into life the breathing stone;
Recal to vigour Bards of former days,
Whose works have fill'd the mouth of Fame with praise.

Far on the right, beneath the cope of night,
Where darkness seems just bursting into light,
Let Ossine stand; a spear his hand must grace,
And honest scars declare the Warrior's face.
Resign'd the glory of the bloody field,
No more he strikes in fight the sounding shield;
On softer notes his martial spirit moves,
Now courts the Muses to the shady groves;
Now calls the deeds of Heroes into Fame,
And strikes the harp to some illustrious name;
Now falling Warriors mark the bloody fray,
And shields and spears compose the broken lay.
In vain the mind on single features dwells,
When all thy work with num'rous beauties swells;
Chief son of Song, to native truth restor'd,
And prov'd the prowess of thy father's sword;
Oh!  might a Bard of those degenerate days,
Bask in thy beam, and brighten in thy blaze;
No more should thou Prosaic creep the ground,
But rise to measure of Castalian sound.

Next, Artist, let the bust of Spencer stand,
And wave the magic circle round the land;
Bring palfries, steeds, fays, fairies, elves in sight,
And Knights and matrons mix in airy fight;
Sweet was his flowing song the Fairy Tale,
Nor did the airy flights of Fancy fail;
Which in the winding of a story told,
To barbarous ears the moral truths unfold.

Then place Roscommon on a judgment seat,
In spite of wealth and title truely great;
Prescribing limits to the flights of Song,
And laws dictating to the rhyming throng;
Bidding to urge, or to restrain their course,
While his example does his laws enforce.

Let Congreve next Roscommon hold his place,
Whose lines can boast of something more than grace;
They give a lasting image of his mind,
Soft, but not weak; and gentle, not too kind.

Now Artist, let thy wondrous skill be known,
A keener chissel, and a finer stone,
For Steele prepare; the Comic Muse disdains
To boast of aught but his, or Farquhar's strains;
From their light scenes confounded Folly flies,
To all her train of Hydra monsters dies;
To just regard they rais'd the comic Play,
And laugh'd the folly of the age away;
So fine the stroke, the satire cut so keen,
The wound was mortal, tho' the edge not seen.

In some conspicuous place let Swift appear,
Inscrib'd with Drapier, Dean, or Gulliver;
No matter which; his formidable looks
Must tell mankind the subject of his books;
Which, fill'd with wit, and keen satiric rage,
Lash'd and improv'd, at once, an impious age.
On a tribunal likewise let him sit,
And sway his sceptre o'er the realms of Wit;
Succeeding Bards, thro' Swift to fame must climb,
And judge the measure of their wit by him:
Fain would the Muse her darling son commend,
A zealous patriot, and as firm a friend;
And see, his country rears the lasting bust,
And highly honours Swift's adored dust,
Who broke the chains by Party rage design'd,
In abject state Ierne's sons to bind;
Whose pen still strove her Freedom to restore,
And burst the force of ill-designing pow'r.

See Parnel comes; prepare the Poet's place;
Draw every virtue smiling on his face;
From Envy free, from Party, Strife, and Rage,
His face must be a picture of his page.
See by his side a little Pope appears,
And calls the Poet into future years,
Amidst the learned circle of his friends,
He stands, and Parnel's moral page commends,
The world obey'd; for Oxford heard the strain,
Nor Harley hears, nor Pope commends in vain.

Such were the Bards who lays immortal sung,
Tho' silent now remain the tuneful tongue,
While such as these Ierne calls her own,
Her sister holds o'er Wit a double throne.
For numbers yet remain behind unnam'd,
For pointed wit, and deepest judgment fam'd;
Whom their own Muse, tho' Gratitude ran dry,
Deathless herself, forbids her sons to die.
