Beneath a beach, the sov'reign of the shade,
Far from the lab'ring clown's intrusive tread,
The pensive love-lorn Frederick was laid,
To feed on thought, which on his comfort fed.

Molly, the brilliant beauty of the plain,
By wav'ring fortune sunk to low degree,
Had oft with transport heard the shepherd swain
In courtship pass the daisy dappled lea.

Till pride parental check'd his honest flame,
Forbid the tender intercourse of soul;
Obedient duty own'd the rigid claim,
And rival'd Love's omnipotent controul.

Joy swiftly fled the lover's bleeding breast,
Despair thick planted daggers in his prey;
With ease each mental avenue possest,
And sighing dragg'd the halting hours away.

Fame thro' the busy hamlet late had spread
For truth, that wealthy William of the Vale
Was now betroth'd the matchless maid to wed,
And wretched Frederick met the trav'ling tale.

To hide his babbling grief in vain he strove,
Prob'd by the sudden sorrow-searching sound;
So sought the faithful friendship of the grove,
Where social thought in solitude is found.

On Nature's verdant velvet couch reclin'd,
A self-tormenting candidate for ease,
Dejected spoke the language of his mind,
And thus his heart unbosom'd to the breeze.

"Why was I doom'd to feel the fair-one's pow'r,
When village pastimes crown'd the jocund day,
Why did she tempt my humble hopes to tow'r,
O wherefore Love command and not obey?

"Through yonder wood, when hand in hand we talk'd,
With trembling tongue I promis'd to be true;
Oft blushing stole sweet kisses as we walk'd,
And bless'd the happy time which now I rue.

"For were the 'Squire's wealthy acres mine,
Nay, all the treasures harvest has in store,
Still must my weeping heart in anguish pine,
False, fickle Molly must be kind no more.

"No more when morn unbars the purple sky,
And nibbling flocks o'erspread the misty dales,
To meet his love shall hapless Fred'rick fly,
Or poise, with willing hands, the frothy pails.

"In vain shall eve her cool retreats prepare,
Of elms wide branching o'er the grassy way;
The fields in vain their greenest garment wear,
And bleating ewes their fleecy fruits display.

"Since the proud maid disdains a rustic's hand,
Tho' poor, yet clean from Court corruption free,
She may be mistress of my rival's land,
Now scorns to wed Obscurity and me.

"Till late, alas!  unknown to bosom strife,
What tho' my table furnish'd humble fare,
Content, the sav'ry sauce that sweetens life,
Supply'd each want, and exil'd every care.

"Tho' plenty deign'd not in my barns to smile,
The poor man's murm'ring ne'er reproach'd my name,
The grateful blessings of the gen'rous soil,
Were ne'er withheld to blast the breath of fame.

"The cackling tribe, which on my pension live,
With golden gills the yolky tribute pay;
Their woolly vests my sheep with pleasure give,
To clothe my lab'ring limbs in coarse array.

"Possest of these my hair breadth span of years,
In poor paternal home would joyful end,
Would charming Molly kindly dry my tears,
Accept my love, and be my nuptial friend.

"Vain hope, e'er this the cruel knot is tied,
Must heap the mighty measure of my woes,
E'er this she triumphs with perfidious pride;
Befriend me, Death, for love and life are foes."

The list'ning Fair, with gen'rous pity mov'd,
Swift from her leafy mask with raptures flew,
Anxious to sooth the Swain she truly lov'd,
With dazzling graces met his doubtful view.

Grief sympathetic, trickling form her eye,
Bedew'd the blushing rose that bloom'd her cheek,
Her lily bosom heav'd the tender sigh,
And taught the tongue of innocence to speak.

"O Shepherd, cease to wound my throbbing heart,
Still, still I'm thine by ev'ry sacred tie,
Our twining souls no human pow'r can part,
By virtue arm'd shall life's worst storms defy.

"The parent yields to thy superior worth,
My future bliss doth all her care employ,
'Tis thee I prize above the sons of earth,
'Tis thee alone can sweeten ev'ry joy."
