Where blooming osiers spred their new-born shade,
Responsive to the ringdove's distant moan,
And kiss the wave that slumbers in the glade,
I wind my pensive way, unseen, unknown.

Far from the jocund scenes pale Sorrow strays,
Where Fancy smiles, or wanton Riot roars;
Pours to the sylvan gloom her plaintive lays,
Or on the murm'ring rill in silence pores.

Here doth she love to breathe the faultering sigh,
And fondly prompt the silver drops to flow,
And oft with heaving breast, and downcast eye,
Hang o'er the soothing, melting tale of woe.

Hark!  'tis the peal of death, whose awful chime
Floats on the gale, and strikes the trembling groves;
The sable triumph of all-conq'ring Time,
In slow parade, and waving banners, moves.

O thou!  renown'd, rever'd, whose breathless clay
Obeys the solemn call that sounds thy doom,
Nor feels the splendour of enlivening day,
Nor dreads the yawning horrors of the tomb.

On thee, her early pride, fair Science smil'd,
Lur'd from the mazes of her dark retreat,
And led thee, wondering, through the boundless wild,
To those sweet bowers where Wisdom fix'd her seat.

And oft thy curious step would lightly trace
The flowery margin of the vocal mead,
Where sports the warbling Muse, or sprightly Grace,
And wakes the Theban lyre, or Doric reed.

Tho' pressing on to Fame's far-sounding shrine,
The dazzling beams of glory round thee play'd,
Still Modesty would blend her paths with thine,
Shrink from the glare, and court the milder shade.

What though to waste the bloom of life alone,
Thy lot prescrib'd, with social cares unblest,
The raptures of connubial love unknown,
And all those joys which warm a father's breast!

Yet still to rear the tender soul was thine,
O'er the fair shoot Instruction's balm to pour,
Luxuriant Art round Virtue's stalk to twine,
And guard from pois'nous weeds the rip'ning flow'r.

What tho' no sculptur'd praise thy tomb adorn,
No filial tears th' unfeeling stone bedew,
No chearless consort wails the hour forlorn,
Nor anguish deep the springs of grief renew!

Yet shall the Muse, thy precepts taught to sing,
Bend o'er thy moss-clad grave with bleeding heart;
Yet shall the towering pride of Isis ring,
And pining Envy own &mdash; thy high desert.
