Astride a grisly one-ey'd stallion
Sat FELT &mdash; the Chief of our Battalion,
Resolv'd each buckish head to spatter,
(The Patriot Felt's by trade a Hatter).
A TALLOW-CHANDLER, much perplext
To guide his poney, canter'd next;
Stuck like a candle in his socket;
A Major's brevet in his pocket.
Next mov'd on, slow, four Pioneers,
With caps that screen'd their gentle ears:
Deaf to all time, or drum, they went,
And look'd as if on ill intent:
Two COOKS, two POTTERS, men of weight,
Who seem'd the Pillars of the State.
Behind these wind-screens, silly plac'd,
Was CROTCH:  white-gloves his fingers grac'd;
A peaceful sabre tight he grasp'd,
And eye'd the Ladies as they pass'd;
Pointing the toe in due position,
As should a well-bred old Musician:
He swears an oath, looks up, and sneers,
And cries, "March on, my Grenadiers!&mdash;"
COUTURE, his Serjeant, was a Tailor,
The son of MANACLE the Jailor,
The fairest of this warlike groupe,
And drest the best of all the troop,
Save TUE-VITAE, who was quite the thing,
Fam'd Bug-destroyer to the King;
His feather'd cap he proudly tost,
And took, as Corp'ral, next, his post.
The other Grenadiers were Sweepers,
Toymen, Lamp-Lighters, Alehouse-Keepers,
Men-Milliners, and Breeches-Makers,
And, last of all, two Undertakers.
The Captain of the centre was
GENCIVE, Quack Dentist, bold as brass:
His Ensign was a dangerous blade;
A man of blood he was by trade,
A very sure and quick dispatcher,
A Faculty-approv'd Rat-Catcher;
His waistcoat was so lin'd with ermine,
You'd thought him 'mongst his friends, the vermin.
A Bard whose coat was sadly torn,
The Patriot Standard did adorn,
And held it so above the throng,
He broke the windows all along;
'Twas an agreement with a Glazier,
Who follow'd with AIRAIN the Brazier.&mdash;
A crack-brain'd Surgeon, Serjeant-Major,
Clos'd up the rear, as for a wager:
So quick he stepp'd that none could match him,
For e'en his Captain could not catch him.

Yet Young Light-Infantry came on
In order due, the rear-upon,
Led by COCHON the Bacon-man,
Of eighteen-stone weight. &mdash; PATTY PAN,
The Pastry-Cook, was one stone lighter,
And in his gaiters somewhat tighter.
All those who after them took place,
Were most a horrid crippled race;
Their Officers were all Shoe-Makers,
Corn-Doctors, Hosiers, lusty Bakers,
Who (since each now on interest goes),
Oppress'd the bellies, or the toes.

All these were rang'd beneath the banners
Of PATRIOTISM &mdash; in different manners:
Some march'd, some limp'd, and some did run
By couples &mdash; others, one by one:
To drink, pick pockets, or to swear;
But all, with pious resolution,
To ratify the CONSTITUTION.
They did &mdash; with loud huzzas, and shouts,
With folly, and with revel routs:
They drank till they their reason lost,
But all to Patriotic Toast;&mdash;
Such as &mdash; "Let's knock all order down,
Despoil the Church, and rob the Crown."
LOUIS came too, to see them dance,
And signed "DESTRUCTION TO ALL FRANCE!"
