Banish'd Parnassus and the neighb'ring plain,
Thus did the Muses to their God complain:
"A race unpolish'd hath our seats possess'd,
And Greece, for arts renown'd, with force oppress'd.
Inur'd to spoil, they scorn the tuneful lyre,
Our sacred numbers, and our heav'nly fire.
No more Anacreon's flowing numbers move,
Nor tender Sappho soothes the soul to love;
Homer neglected lies, and Pindar's flame
No hero warms, near fair Hinenus' stream.
Hear then, thou beamy pow'r, bright god of day!
Since ev'ry land lies open to the ray,
Some soft retreat, some silent mansion chuse,
And there from rage protect the injur'd Muse."
The God assents, and in a western isle,
A winding vale, with skill divine, he forms,
Secure from summer's heat, and winter's storms:
On either side he rears a lofty mound,
In whose deep bosom lies the Glin profound.
The rocks and woods adorn it's bending sides,
And here a fallling stream soft murm'ring glides:
Above the rest two rocks of monstrous size,
With their aspiring foreheads reach the skies;
The one, a naked heap, vast, craggy, high,
With pleasing horror fills the wond'ring eye;
The other, crown'd with wood, her front erects
Above the vale, and a cool shade projects.
Upon the naked cliff, the birds of Jove
Bring forth the pledges of their fruitful love;
Here teach their young a bolder flight to dare,
And bear the forky thunder thro' the air.
Between these rocks, the bale obliquely bends
His curse, and is a huge high quarry ends:
Down this vast steep a fountain gently slides,
Or, swell'd with rain, rolls on his foamy tides;
Then thro' the vale in wild meanders flows,
Here hides his limpid waves, there kindly shows.
Oft have Diana and her virgin train,
Tir'd with the pleasures of the open plain,
In this recess their wearied limbs repos'd,
And to soft winds their softer parts expos'd:
Here, oft her train have round their Goddess stood
While naked, she enjoy'd the silver flood:
The Paphian Queen, and all her winged Loves,
For this, have quit their high Idalian groves,
Here, with the Muses pass'd their flowing hours
Near the cools stream, or in the shady bow'rs;
While all the Nine their golden harps have strung,
And Waller's verse on Sacharissa sung.
Thus did Apollo for his choir prepare
A seat, remov'd from noise, and anxious care,
For which the Muse in gratitude has brought
Into that isle the Greek and Roman thought;
There, to her Spencer, gave the sounding string,
And first taught Swift, and Denham, how to sing.
