Now o'er the world in sable cincture clad,
Night rolls her awful clouds.  Her misty veil
Hangs black'ning 'fore the eye, whose visual orb
In vain attempts to penetrate the gloom
Condens'd; save where the cotton 'mers'd in oil
Within some glassy concave yields its flame
Twinkling; and save where in the servile hand
Behind a rattling coach, the taedal stick
Held waving glimmers on the face of things.
Free from the business of the bustling day,
This interval indulging, to the club
Of spouters I repair; where mortal forms,
Born high upon the feathers of conceit,
Rise into air; while puffing blasts of wind,
Bursting from loosely-flying fancy's cave,
Blow them to regions where Theatra dwells.
Here, o'er the summit of a chair I loll;
My circumspective eyes explore the room,
A groupe of staring objects strike my sight;
Features distinct and various.  While upon
The table's oval, the resplendent cup
Its pure contents and frothy surface boasts
Invigorant.  Virginia's plant matur'd
Lies in the centre.  With a clay-form'd tube
Each member graces his extended hand.
Above the rest, with looks erect and sage,
Deputed sits the regent of the night,
In elbow-chair pre-eminent.  His hand
The silence-knocking hammer wields.  Before
His optic balls are plac'd two shining plates,
Betwixt whose pewter confines, interspers'd
With glittering pieces of argental coin,
Lie wide-spread half-pence, jingling at the touch.
There great he sits, with glee magnificent,
The strong potation quaffing.  On the slate
The num'rous pots he marks, with aspect keen.
So, with superior power invested, sits
A constable elate, in dome rotund,
Imbibing porter solid.  With an air
Self-confident he scrawls the captive's name.
Now moves around, with circulation quick,
The tankard less'ning.  Strait again receives
Its due completion.  Like the changing tide
It ebbs and flows alternate.  Curling spires
Ascending paint the plaister'd canopy
Fuliginous:  the warfare dims the sight,
And thro' the smoaky mist the candles shine
Azure. &mdash; But lo!  a Roscian stands erect
Stentorophontes.  Him long time I mark'd,
Saw meditation hover o'er his brow,
And all his faculties absorb'd in thought.
He bends his head addressive to the board,
And thus harangues &mdash; "Why sit we here thus mute,
And frustrate all the purpose of our meeting?
Already has the hoarse-lung'd watchman bawl'd
Past nine o'clock." &mdash; So saying, forth he stalks,
With step theatric.  Mark his buskin tread,
And eye-balls rolling.  Rang'd along the floor
The candles blaze.  And now the signal giv'n,
All bend their eyes on him &mdash; No longer now
Pauses the youth, but storms in wild Macbeth.
Lo!  now apparent, on his horrid front
Sits grim distortion.  Every feature's lost,
Screw'd horrible, unhumaniz'd &mdash; On stage
Of quick itinerant thus have I seen
An Andrew wring the muscles of his face,
Deforming nature, and extort the grin
And wonder of the many-headed crowd.
He spoke:  when strait a loud applauding noise
Ensues; the clap of hands and thump of feet
Commingling.  Knuckles on the table's verge
With fury beating, and the sound of sticks
Junctive confirm the rattle of applause.
Tremble the pewter vases, and within
The fluid fluctuates.  The surging pipes
Roll from their beds of tin.  The wooden plain
Is strew'd on all sides with the clatt'ring ruin.

Lo!  now another of theatric mould
"Rises in majesty," yclep'd
Ranter.  Forth issue from his steaming mouth
These long imprison'd Alps of tow'ring smoke,
"Riding upon the bosom of the air."
Him had his inauspicious cruel stars
Destin'd to oil, to dress the flowing curl,
And with nice hand to weave the yielding hair.
But each revolving, rising, setting sun
Beheld this hero looking on his trade
With eyes indignant.  His exalted soul
Launch'd 'yond the limits of his narrow sphere.
Fraught with extended notions of the stage,
His ample-daring mind the drama's laws
Sole entertain'd &mdash; The tonsor now assumes
The part of Richard, and with aukward strut
Affects majestic air. &mdash; So, at the wake,
Roger begins the dance, but wanting skill,
Betrays himself unequal to the task.
Thy graceful period, so oft admir'd,
Divine inspir'd Shakespear!  on his tongue
Imperfect die away.  His labour'd speech
Sounds gutt'ral, like the hoarsely croaking race
Upon the banks of some pellucid stream.
Scarce had he finished, when salutes his ears
The mingled noise upon the dusty floor
Reverberant.  Down the shaver sits
Well-pleas'd.  And next upstarts Hibernia's son,
Like some enthusiast on a tripod rais'd
With apish gesture, and with strange grimace,
To rant unto the multitude.  The cork
Intruded swift into the candle's blaze
Is nigrified, and marks th' aspiring youth
With whiskers bold.  Ferocity now darts
From either eye her broad unmeaning stare,
In Bajazet he raves, and lowering bids
Defiance.  'Yond just nature's ample pow'r
He rants elaborate.  His roaring voice
Calls eccho forth respondent.  On the mart
Of filthy Billingsgate thus have I heard
A harsh lung-cracking noise, nor yet to this
Dissimilar.  He ended; but the tribe
With-hold the grasp'd-at banners of applause.
Then down he sits, with woful aspect dull.
But strait emerging from a sea of thought,
He swallows hasty the salubrious stream,
And re-inthrones his abdicated soul.
Brozoides next his meteor lays down
Igniferous.  Him had his parents sent
To London (seat of business) &mdash; there the laws
Of England's state to learn and exercise.
For him a well-experience'd Don was found,
Whose quick-turn'd eyes foresaw each quibble quaint,
And quirk evasive.  As an osier light,
That bending yields to ev'ry blast of wind,
His heart to fraud was flexible, &mdash; his heart,
Where dark deceit, in honest guise array'd,
Had sown its seeds, and poison'd ev'ry grain
Which warm'd by potent truth's congenial ray,
With virtue's plenteous harvest might have teem'd.
But fruitless was the youth's parental aim,
Tho' sedulous.  For scarce two years had roll'd
Since fair Augusta first had pleas'd his eyes,
When great Brozoides first soliloquiz'd:
"Was it for this, that o'er the classic deep
I sail'd, and landed on poetic shores?
Have I for this flew round th' Aonian mount
With plumes immortal, and so often play'd
With spotless Muses, in Pierian meads?
Am I, ye Gods, eternally to scribe
Inglorious?  No &mdash; Some pow'r uplifts my soul
Buoyant, above the common class of earth's
Dull reptiles.  Hence ye wrong adjudg'd reports,
Ye dry collections hence.  I leave ye all
To those grave, solid looking fools, whose ears
Tautology best charms.  Oh!  Shakespear, come
With all thy pupils.  Fire my glowing breast,
Expand my genius, and enlarge my soul."
Kindled that instant at the raptur'd thought,
His intellects, high-tow'ring, flew to realms
Dramatic.  There the storehouse of his brain
He fill'd redundant.  Here he tries his skill
Theatric, ere upon the graceful stage
With steps adventurous he dares to tread.
So children dabble in the shallow stream
Playful, till fear forsakes their little souls;
Then bold thy rush into the middle Thames.
"List, list, O list" &mdash; Oh!  how his tuneful voice
Rises and falls, as Oysterella's soft,
And strong, when ev'ry street and curving lane
Adjacent, eccho the testaceous cry.
He spouted &mdash; and receiv'd his share of praise.

Inflated with the swellings of conceit,
And newly flush'd with large-aspiring hopes
Of excellence, uprises Leatheronzo
Fam'd.  In repairing worn-out calcuments
None was his equal.  No one better knew
The painted awl to handle.  Yet his breast
With rage dramatic glow'd.  In mad-struck Lear
The scene he opens:  but for want of crown
Paus'd his mock-majesty.  Around the place
Long time his eyes terrific rowl'd.  At length
"In a black corner of the room he spied"
An empty urinal. &mdash; Fir'd at the sight,
He snatch'd the vacuum, and to his head
Adapted it well pleas'd.  Now, now he raves
With brazen lungs, until a sudden jerk
His action terminates.  Upon the floor
Down drops the Jordan.  As it rolls along
It rings applause unto his list'ning ear.

Lo!  now springs forward with elastic step,
A son of comedy, Soccado call'd.
The tunic daz'ling with its golden pride,
The button-hole gay-wrought with wond'rous art,
The mode-cut collar, and well-fancied sleeve,
Had oft proclaim'd his taste.  Yet not to this
Was his great soul confin'd.  Theatra now,
Dramatic goddess, whispers in his ear,
And bids him shine away in Foppington.
Where's  now that stately flatness of the gait,
That easy stiffness where?  so often seen
In thee, O Cibber!  and so oft admir'd.
Alas!  how faintly, rudely copied here!
With joints inflexible, and neck oblique,
An object stiff'ning to the sight he stands
In attitude unmeaning, and deprives
Each injur'd word of its emphatic due.
He finish'd, when the wonted noise begins,
Loud as his all-attentive ears can wish,
Nor less than that which shakes the bending stairs
To the theatric semi-circled seats
Hight upper gallery, ductive, when some
Grand-habited scene-boasting pantomime,
From 'hind their compters, and from cleaning knives,
And from tenebrious porter-breathing cells,
Where all the day long in glee they tipling sat,
Calls forth the terene quick-ascending gods.
Prologues and epilogues increase the sport,
To periodize the humours of the night,
Now sage advanc'd, goes round the jovial song,
The laugh-exciting catch, or wanton tale
Reiterated.  Bacchus, King of joys,
Reigns arbitrary.  With its vapours bland
Their giddy-rolling heads, anointed turn
Upon an axis brittle.  Total noise
Its anarchy extends.  But ho! How soon
Terrestrial mirth evaporates.  Amidst
Their jocund glee, and lovely floating hours,
Enter the Constables.  Ten watchmen brave
Their presence dignify.  Amazement chill
Sits on each spouting face.  So looks the wretch
Involv'd in debt, when first he spies the front,
The front most hated of a catch-pole grim.
Not e'en Macbeth stands more appall'd with fear,
When murder'd Banquo's horrid-glaring ghost
Disturbs the regal banquet.  Such, so great
Their fear unmanly, that their passive souls
To their hard fate submit.  Restless all,
All walk desponding to the round-house dire,
And one sad exit terminates the scene.

All hail to thee!  thou young dramatic bard!
Ingenious M&mdash;r&mdash;y, hail!  Before thy shrine
I bend the knee.  This epidemic rage
Well hast thou ridicul'd.  Oh!  may thy scenes
On Fame's high-pending annals be enroll'd:
And as thy Muse shall henceforth deign to grace
Th' enlightened scene, and with a steady hand
To hold up Nature's mirrour, may the tribe
Of snarling critics, with invidious eyes,
View the bright image, and confess it true.
