PATTY.
Why does Smiletta's bosom fall and rise,
Why flow those tears, and whence proceed those sighs?
Say, my Smiletta, what afflicts thy heart?
Permit thy Patty to endure a part.

SMILETTA.
Ah!  dearest Patty, my complaint is such
As, to relate, would flutter thee too much.

PATTY.
Women, with women, should their sorrows share:
For these, like secrets, one can never bear.

SMILETTA.
Give, then, thy close attention, hear my grief,
And let thy tears afford me some relief.
As I was sat at work &mdash; there chanc'd to pop,
A smart young fellow into our shop:
That moment Cupid struck me with his dart,
And made a victim of my foolish heart,
Thoughts cannot pre-suppose, or words express
His taste, his turn, his elegance of dress;
But this is nothing to the matchless grace
That shone resistless in his charming face;
Forgive me, Patty, pity this my lot,
Tho' the world hate, do thou despise me not.
Men have persuasive tongues which oft prevail,
And our poor sex, God knows, was ever frail.
He promised fair; I listened and believ'd,
And was, like more poor silly things, deceiv'd.
He nam'd a place, and begg'd I'd meet him there;
To meet him early, was my early care.
He came &mdash; what followed you may well surmise,
Take caution, Patty, and be timely wise:
Trust not mankind; your ruin they pursue,
When the deceiver had my virtue stain'd.
He told me, flatly, all his ends were gain'd;
For ever since that hateful, cursed night,
He quits me, shuns me, hates my very sight.
Let the base hand that thus hath stabb'd my fame,
Whom sighs, nor tears, nor pity can reclaim,
Stand as a warning to my Patty's care,
How the same evils with her friend she share:
As to my friend &mdash; may conscience shame his face,
Haunt all his walks, and plunge him in disgrace;
May some unhappy passion seize his breast,
By day torment him, and by night molest;
For ever may his soul be torn with grief,
And as he seems determined to remain
Deaf to my calls, and senseless to my pain;
My vows, my tears, my supplications scorn,
And make me curse the hour I was born:
May some fell syren haunt him, and remain
Deaf to his calls, and senseless to his pain,
His pray'rs, petitions, supplications scorn,
And make him curse the hour he was born.

PATTY.
Your case I pity, and your fate deplore,
But cease your tears, and grieve yourself no more;
None live who taste no bitter with their sweet,
Tho' some, much greater plagues than others, meet:
Let us, from what is past, this lesson reap,
That girls should always look before they leap.
