Still partial to her earliest theme,
The Muse once more attunes her lay,
And gayly hails the rosy beam
That ushers the auspicious day!
This day, when Hope's delicious voice
Bade the expecting world rejoice,
When pleas'd BRITANNIA called into rest
The blooming Form that now illumes her breast.

Eye yon grey shadows take their flight,
Or Sleep from peaceful pillows free,
Led on by Fancy's rapid light,
The GENIUS of the ISLE I see!
Deep in yon grove of oaks retir'd,
Behold his eye with rapture fir'd!
As round his head the Patriot Virtues fly,
With Pity, purple Love, and sweet-ey'd Sympathy.

"Oh!  come coelestial Powers," they sing,
And celebrate this festal Day;
Diffuse your blooms, your odours bring,
And pour to Heav'n the grateful lay,
For him who kindly bade us rear
Our rural Shades and Altars here,
Gave us protection from the venal Band,
And with the Graces led us round the Land."

BRITAIN'S GENIUS sweeps the wires,
And smiling joins the warbling throng,
They sing what Gratitude inspires,
And Angels seem to aid the Song.
"Bless him," they cry, "ye sorrowing train,
To whom you never su'd in vain;
Blest may he be through Albion's ample bound!
Blest may he be!" the Earth and Skies resound.

"Teach him, O Heav'n, with eagle eyes,
Dauntless to gaze on Truth's keen light,
And boldly rend the rich disguise
That wraps each artful paradise:
And when his foot, at some late hour,
Shall mount the golden Seat of Pow'r,
While Love, and Loyalty, and Pomp unite,
To steep his panting spirits in delight;

"Say, on the tide of future Time,
No mortal knows what mischiefs sail,
Tho' Peace now hovers o'er the clime,
And jocund Plenty paints each vail;
Tho' Nature, with magnific hand,
Has thrown her barriers round the Land;
Tho' Commerce, laughing at the foaming Main,
Has stretch'd to ev'ry Port her glitt'ring chain;&mdash;

So shall he, (tho' the Air breathes blam,
Tho Roses o'er his Couch be shed;
Tho' one entire seducing calm
The radiant Face of Day o'erspread)&mdash;
So shall he stand, firm, unappall'd;
By Honour or by Danger call'd,
Indignant spurn at Pleasure's potent spell,
And with a Patriot hand, the threat'ning glooms repel."

But, lo!  unclouded streams the light:
Soft! &mdash; yon etherial Visions fade,
To silent grottoes take their flight,
Which only Poets' eyes invade;
Yet as they wing the waken'd gale,
"Health to AUGUSTUS!" fills the vale;
"Health to AUGUSTUS!" ev'ry Shepherd sings;
"Health to AUGUSTUS!" thro' the island rings.
