Oh!  for some portion of that great sublime,
That diction Philippean, which emblaz'd
The Splendid Shilling &mdash; then this Heart of Oak
Should live remember'd by each bard, and prove
A lasting cudgel for the criticks pate.

To powder'd beau, and to exhausted rake,
Tott'ring with spindle shank, the can I leave
Clouded or plain, whose rich embellish'd head
Is proudly capt with ornamental gold,
And fraught with forms antique of bass-relief.
Be mine the sturdy plant of British oak
Unpolish'd, unadorn'd!  the solid branch
I grasp, I wield.  Rough insolence, give way!
Or thou shalt reel beneath my nervous arm.
By thee I dare the little snarling cur,
And mastiff open-mouth'd.  Ye lounging sons
Of land Hibernian, on whose brazen front
Sits arrogance unequall'd, in whose chairs
Oft lolls the son of Folly &mdash; By your leave
My pass-port do I claim:  and ye, whose tongues
The midnight hour proclaim &mdash; both ye with voice
Feeble, as are your frames, and ye with lungs
Hoarse, as the roaring boatswain, give me room!
Room o'er the hollow pavement, or your poles
Shall prove but rushes to my firmer shield.
Menace me not; for by the fractur'd head,
The noise ensanguin'd, and the clos'd-up eye!
By batter'd temples!  by the Cornish hug;
The punch stomachic, and the fall severe!
By these!  by all that of Broughtonian skill
Ye boast!  I swear &mdash; my resolute emprize
Ye shall not stagger &mdash; therefore give me way,
Nor rashly brave my desperate resolve.
Talk not to me, ye slaves, of Roundhouse dire,
Nocturnal constable, or justice grave.
Weak are your threats.  Your canting flow of words
My argumentum baculinum far exceeds.
Avaunt &mdash; behold I have a weapon tough,
A better never did a low'ring tar
Sustain intrepid; and I've seen the night,
That with this little arm, and this good Oak,
I've beat my way thro' all your lanthorn'd hosts.
No more of that &mdash; 'twas victory ill tim'd.

Behold yon sailor, from exotic clime
Arriv'd, his manly features deeply bronz'd
By suns American.  Beneath one arm
He tows his Susan, while his other shakes
Stout Oaken Towel, and with that defies
The strutting gladiator's harmless sneer.
Before him flies the school-boy in affright,
And cautious porters sneak without the post,
With eye askaunt, not caring to resist
Champion so formidable.  Forward tramps
The hero of the path, and levels all
Who singly dare to check him in his way.
Then, if perchance his rendezvous he joins
In alehouse snug, where with is comrades gay
He revels blithe, and to the fiddle's tune
Beats time hornpipical, with graceful air
His plant he holds, or twirls it o'er his hand.

But lo!  my friend!  how droll would'st thou appear,
If golden head emboss'd, adorn'd thy knob,
Accompanied with ferule similar,
Thy trunk yet unembellished.  Thus the man
Hight country esquire, inconsistent looks,
When on his boorish head he chucks the hat
Cock'd by Jack Adams, or some tasteful wight
Of foreign growth &mdash; or when with Gallic pride
His thick splay foot, he dignifies superb,
With red Morocco calceament high heel'd.

But here my Oaken Towel!  dost thou beam
Athwart my mind reflection's vivid ray.
Who knows where now resides thy parent stock!
Perhaps upon its native plain it stands,
Shelt'ring both bird and beast, or on the seas
Floats thunder-arm'd, triumphant o'er the foe.
Howbeit, I will hold thee dear, and when
Thy form is shatter'd by the strokes of time,
Still will I thank thee for thy service past,
And o'er my chimney hang thy remnants up.
