Thy virtues O GENEVA!  yet unsung,
By antient or by modern bard, the muse,
In verse sublime shall celebrate.  And thou
O W&mdash;! statesman most profound!  vouchsafe
To lend a gracious ear; for fame reports,
That thou, with zeal assiduous, dost attempt
Superior to Canary or Champaigne,
GENEVA salutiferous to enhance;
To rescue it, from hand of porter vile,
And basket-woman, and to the bouffet
Of lady delicate, and courtier grand,
Exalt it:  Well from thee may it assume,
The glorious modern name of Royal BOB!

"O may I live to hail the day!" when thou
(Suspending the fatigue of state affairs)
Shalt make the city tour, and condescend
To visit my poor mansion, and, beneath
Its humble roof, take a reviving glass
Of anodyne GENEVA!  Spirit pure,
With berries sanative impregnated!

Long had the Brewers, with invidious eye
View'd the Distillers:  frequent their attempts
GENEVA to debase, and ALE uplift.
Contention fierce arose, ill consequence
Portending.  Justice, willing to decide
The cause, a special court conven'd.  And now
The day appear'd, the great, th' important day,
Big with the fate of ALE, and of GENEVA!

Within her awful court, in solemn pomp
Astrea sits:  there shine her sword keen-edg'd,
And golden ballance.  Yonder Feculento,
The genius of Malt Liquor, makes approach,
Puffing, and waddling on, with heavy pace:
His visage bloated, his protuberant paunch,
Of size enormous, like the mighty tun
Of Heidelberg.  Two dray-men, grim with yeast,
And clay, and grounds, th' unweildy lump support.

The genius of GENEVA, Clara nam'd,
Succeeded him:  in her right hand, a branch
Of Juniper she bore:  Defendant she.

With croud promiscuous, soon the spacious hall
Was fill'd; Distillers, Brewers, parties chief:
And swarms of those, who grooty BEER imbibe,
Or clear GENEVA.  Coaxing courtesans
Night wandring, vigilant in quest of prey.
And youth bare footed, sable vested, who,
Hood-wink'd, intrepid, chimney foul ascends,
With knees and shoulders climbing, and with brush
Uplifted, particles fulginous
Precipitates.  The men who rapid drive,
With Phaetonic lash, the foaming steeds
Of hackney vehicle impure.  And females
Industrious, who, with basket white as curd,
At Leaden-hall or Newgate-market ply,
For honest livelihood.  The warbling nymphs,
Who chaunt card matches in harmonious lay,
The pride of Rosemary-lane!  And those who loud,
With hoarser tone, and mouth extended wide,
Cry flounders, whitings, barrel-cod and sprats;
Fishmongers peripatetic!  Those who vend,
In Weekly Journal, scandal, politics,
Religion, nonsence, treason, morals, lies,
New schemes and prodigies; and who e'er long
Shall hawk this wondrous work of mine.  And those
Who tempting invitation give, to buy
Lemons and oranges, Hesperian fruit!
Whose grateful acid juice in china bowl
Exprest, and there commixt with water pure,
Drawn from transparent spring, sugar refin'd,
And BRANDY Coniac, Jamaica RUM,
Or costly ARRACK brought from Batavian shore,
Makes PUNCH nectareous!  Princely beverage!
In days of yore unknown.  Nor wanted there
The laughing pert coquette, or prude demure,
Or hypocritic saint, or rake, or beau,
Or dextrous youth who blacks his honors shoes.

Now at the bar arriv'd, the Plaintiff belch'd,
And thus began.  O Justice!  canst thou see
Unshock'd, that Fautress of GENEVA here?
A PUBLICK NUSANCE!  mischief epidemic!&mdash;

That from GENEVA ills incredible
Proceed, is obvious.  What debilitates
The limbs, the health impairs, and quick destroys
The constitution!  'Tis GENEVA &mdash; Thence
Diseases issue, no less numerous, dire
And virulent, than erst (as poets sing)
Flew from Pandora's box.  What is it that
Enervates th' understanding, stupifies
The senses, temps the poor to be profuse
Of time irrevocable, and to waste
Their little stock of cash, habituates
To laziness, debauchery, and brings
Inevitable penury?  GENEVA.
GENEVA!  the pernicious origin
Of villanies ineffable!  unknown
To former ages.  Ruffians, by its fumes
Intoxicated, dare to perpetuate
Crimes monstrous, desperate, unparallel'd,
And horrible to name!  Not Mohocks fierce,
With glaring eyes, and whiskers formidable,
Dread misanthropes!  were more tremendous, when
At dead of night, intent on mischief, they
Itinerants nocturnal terrified.

Since evils great as these, incessant flow
From this destructive liquor; can we doubt
Of hearing sentence from your judgment-seat,
Propitious to the Brewers?  Thus he spoke,
When, from the Brethren of the firkin, lo!
A sudden cloud flew up of hats, and wigs,
And greasy caps, which darken'd all the court,
And loud acclaim, the vaulted roof rebounded.

Silence commanded; Clara, graceful then
Arose, and thus.  O Goddess!  I rejoice
That 'tis at thy tribunal I am now
To plead; for bribe or pension never can
Have influence here; in vain, against the truth,
Success may prejudice or party hope.
Nor need I, with rhetoric flourishes,
Attempt the passions of my Judge to move:
Mean artifice!  and fit to work on none
But weak and little souls.  With reason then,
And facts indubitable, shall I urge
My plea.  My tumid adversary makes
Assertions bold, but arguments to prove,
He offers none; and none indeed can we
Expect, from Orator who can conceive,
That things are obvious when incredible!
Fit pleader he, for articles and creed,
And all the orthodox absurdities
By churchmen instituted, and impos'd
On the weak populace.  The catalogue
Of vices, which to our account he brings,
Avails him not.  We come not here to plead
The merits of Intemperance.  Will ev'n he
Deny, that muddy BEER inebriates too?
Or can he, by the actions of a sot,
Determine, whether he GENEVA has
Or BEER excessive drank?  Alike pernicious
The consequence of this, and that, appears.
If difference is, GENEVA justly claims
Th' advantage:  This has virtues numerous, great;
But what has That to boast of?  Never yet
Did doctor sage, in learned Recipe,
Prescribe Malt liquor; but, with caution wise,
Debar'd the patient from it.  Who would think,
An advocate for ALE, should e'er complain,
That dram salubrious, robs the labouring poor,
Of time and money?  When the loss of time
Is greater, greater is th' expence by far,
Malt liquor to consume.  The market-woman,
With basket on her head, can take a glass,
Preservative from all th' inclemencies
Of weather; short the interruption is,
And small the charge.  But he, disastrous wight!
Whom to an Alehouse, fate malignant brings;
Squanders unwarily, the little all,
On which his half-starv'd family depends:
One pot succeeds another; company,
And cards and dice, skettles and shuffle-boards
Engage his hours:  or he, decoy'd perhaps
By wheedling punk, to private room retires:
No splendid shilling, then his purse retains;
And well he fares too, if he but escapes
Itch Neapolitan.  Not so the offices
That vend GENEVA, to the publick view
They stand expos'd; apartments most unfit
For crimes infandous.  Never to this hour,
Did pathics vile, detestable, select
Such place, a wickedness to perpetrate,
Shocking to nature.  No &mdash; Recess obscure,
In Alehouse blind, they seek.  Then robbery,
Treason and murder, devastation wild,
And persecution, monster horrible!
Prime minister of hell!  to liberty,
To virtue, reason, truth, and every good,
Foe most implacable!  has every age
Produc'd, even when GENEVA was unknown.
Those vices then, some other origin,
Whate'er it was, must have.  That what gave birth
To them, the present vices did produce,
Most natural is to think.

All bounteous heaven
Bestows no blessing but may be abus'd,
GENEVA not excepted:  And shall we,
In order these abuses to reform,
The blessing extirpate?  Is it more
Becoming beings, rational and just,
T' inflict the punishment on none, but who
Are culpable? &mdash; But men have been transform'd
To brutes, by this destructive liquor &mdash; True.
And men have by destructive Razors, had
Their wind pipes cut.  And must not tonsor then
Be suffer'd, razor keen to wield, when he
On chin fecundous depredation makes?

If some, grown fond of physic, will exceed
The dose prescrib'd, and finish thus their lives:
Will he, whose senses are not quite deprav'd,
Blame medicine for this?  Call it destructive
To human constitution?  Yet he may,
As justly, as my foe abdominous
Exclaims against GENEVA.

Great NASSAU!
Immortal name!  Britain's deliverer
From slavery, from wooden shoes and chains,
Dungeons and fire!  Attendants on the sway
Of tyrant bigotted, and zeal accurst
Of holy butchers, prelates insolent,
Despotic and bloody thirsty!  He who did
Expiring liberty revive!  Godlike hero!  He
It was, who, to compleat our happiness,
With liberty restor'd, GENEVA introduc'd!

O Britains!  O my countrymen!  can you
To glorious WILLIAM now commence ingrates,
And spurn his ashes?  Can you villify
The sovereign cordial he has pointed out,
Which by your own misconduct only, can
Prove detrimental?  Martial WILLIAM drank
GENEVA, yet no age could ever boast
A braver prince than he.  Within his breast
Glow'd every royal virtue!  Little sign,
O genius of Malt liquor!  that GENEVA
Debilitates the limbs, the health impairs
And mind enervates.  Men for learning fam'd,
And skill in medicine, prescrib'd it then
Frequent in Recipe:  nor did it want
Success, to recommend its virtues vast,
To late posterity.

Hail Juniper!
Sacred to Phoebus!  Poison, pestilence,
And all contagion, all the effects we dread
From bite of serpent venemous, retreat
At thy approach precipitant.  To thee
Their preservation from infection, owe
The crouded jails, and suburbs of the town,
Where privies overflow, and common sewers;
And dogs half putrify'd offensive lie;
And shambles, fraught with offals, blood, and filth,
Emit stench fetid, most abominable.

When Hollander, by drinking BEER impure,
Ischuria torturing, or strangury sharp,
Groans under; what is it preserves his life?
GENEVA diuretic, pregnant with
Detergent salts:  this gives a passage free
To fluid excrementitious.  When the stone,
Or gravel, cause excruciating pain,
Tis this, affords relief miraculous.
Carminative superior; greater foe
To gnawing cholick, nature never yet
Brought forth.  When e'er the overflowing gall,
Tinctures Corinna, with a saffron hue,
GENEVA, in the biliary canals
Removes th' obstruction, and her bloom returns.
If fits convulsive seize; or if consumptions,
The human fabrick waste; or epilepsy
Sudden attacks the senses; palsy shakes,
Or chilling ague; to the patient let
GENEVA be administred; success
Stupendious will ensue.  Friend to the sight,
The optic nerves it fortifies:  and adds
Strength to the limbs and brain; the appetite
Deprav'd restores:  submissive to its pow'r
The asthma yields.  Would my antagonist,
Hydroptick as he is, but have recourse
To this for help, that monstrous bulk of his,
Would quickly be to proper size reduc'd.
This warms the heart, and this exilerates
The spirits, when deprest with care and grief.

These, are but few of the vast benefits,
Afflicted mankind to GENEVA owe,
When not by gross intemperance abus'd.
But time would fail me, to enumerate
Its virtues manifold.  My opponent,
Has not one virtue in Malt liquor shewn.
The mischiefs he complains of, not affect
GENEVA, to GENEVA not peculiar,
But common to intemperance; and may
Even with advantage, be to ALE apply'd.

To thy decision, righteous goddess!  now,
Dreadless I leave the merits of my cause.

She spoke.  Her golden scales Astrea, then
Uprais'd; in one, GENEVA'S merits plac'd:
The merits of Malt liquor, t' other held:
The latter, quick flew up, and kick'd the beam.
