Sweet Peace succeeds the direful clang of war,
To gowns and wigs, the scarlet jackets yield,
Thrice blest Norvicum, in your Catton Mayor,
At once the City's ornament and shield.

Ye Virgins who dwell on Parnassus's top,
Who in clear Aganippe oft moisten a sop;
O grant me one mess of your Helicon porridge,
While I chaunt the wise deeds of their Worships of Norwich.
Thou too, who illumin'st the earth by thy ray,
And who grac'dst (by thine absence) that glorious day;
And thou, limping Vulcan, that night's mighty Lord;
And thou, Citizen Sheriffs, still first in a squabble;
O great Peter Bushel!  thou King of the rabble;
Attend, while I tell of our great celebration,
Of the glorious Peace, lately bought by this nation.

I.
Fast, on the housetops, tell the pattering rain,
The jangling bells the drowsy morn awoke,
The rattling pop-guns thunder'd o'er the plain,
The noisy boys shook off dull Morpheus' yoke;
Their crackers, to their shouts, responsive spoke;
The market place is fill'd with smoke and fire,
The clamorous mob run yelling through the smoke,
Dashes their feet beneath the splashing mire;
Rain, bells, boys, pop-guns, mob, unite in discord dire.

II.
Now, while the Heavens in ceaseless torrents pour,
The Light-Horse Volunteers move thro' the street,
A blacksmith's shed preserves them from the shower;
Ah!  shelter for such heroes most unmeet!
This day, their numbers are well nigh compleat;
Say, for what cause their rank so crowded stands?
Peace crowns their labours; yet, full well I weet,
Some weightier motive sways the gallant bands,
Roast meat they honour, more than all their Chief's commands.

III.
Rear'd in the market, stands a pine tree tall,
(Like that which erst proud Satan's steps upbore)
It seems the mast of some great admiral,
So high it towers, and looks the chimneys o'er,
Piled round with faggots; while from every door,
The citizens its height with horror eye,
They hear in thought the crackling billets roar,
They see the sparks among their houses fly;
A bonfire much they liked, but like it not so high.

IV.
Round this, fierce P&mdash;tt&mdash;n his legions calls,
And eke round this, the parish corps appear;
Tho' train'd to arms, to guard the city walls,
With inward dread, the rattling drum they hear;
Along they march, with looks full sad and drear;
The rain adown their garments pours apace;
No hope of dinner does their spirits chear,
All woe-begone is each poor devil's face,
Alas!  how full of woe is parish soldier's case.

&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;

THE PROCESSION OF THE COURT ROUND THE FIRE.
CC,LXXXVIII.
A top in air the raging flame ascends,
And streaks the dusky clouds with horrid light;
The busy mob with care the bonfire tends,
Their shrilly shouts pierce the dull ear of night.
Forth from the hall (illumed with torches bright)
Descend the Aldermen &mdash; a silken cloak,
And gown of scarlet, decks each reverend wight:
Who that had once beheld these goodly folk,
Would e'er on mayors or elders, crack his witless joke!

CC,LXXXIX.
Before the train, is borne the dreadful sword,
With the bright terrors of each gilded mace,
Marches, in awful state, the city's lord,
And each grave elder fills his destin'd place;
H&mdash;rr&mdash;g  and B&mdash;ck&mdash;e the procession grace,
With all the crew that on the people fawn'd,
But 'mongst them, &mdash; shew'd not his dismal face,
No blazing lamps that night  his house adorn'd,
Peace, mob, and mayor alike, his rebel spirit scorn'd.

CCXC.
As when a gang of savage Caribs find
A traveller (who perchance has lost his way
In some dark wood), the straggling wretch they bind,
And, mad with hunger, him full soon they slay,
A fire they light to broil their destin'd prey,
Their chiefs, in savage dance, about it skip;
So, round the bonfire, did these elders gay,
(With hat in hand) a merry measure trip,
While the mob roar'd their joy, with many a sportive quip.

Cetera desunt.
