To thee sweet nymph, nymph of the jocund eye,
And coral lip, and laughter dimpled cheek,
Say, shall I raise the song,
The song in tribute thine.
As erst when favour'd by the kindly smiles,
Health, ruddy health strung ev'ry youthful nerve,
And by yon rushy brook
I sung of health and thee.
Say, shall I seek thee in the dark'ning shade
Of length'n'd branching oaks, or hamlet brown,
Or upland dewy dale,
Brushing the dews away.
'Tis thine I know to wind the ecchoing horn,
Curb the fleet steed, or urge the hardy chace,
Or at the 'custom'd round
Prepare the sylvan treat.
'Tis thine to wander by the babbling rills,
Piping to list'ning swains the Doric reed,
Sweet reed, whose melting sounds
To virtue charm the soul.
Nor less 'tis thine in sacred rites enthron'd,
Far from the groups of loudly laughing mirth,
Far from the revel hauts
Of wildly wanton maids;
Such as where Venus with disorder'd vest
And breathing zone, leads up the am'rous dance,
And mad with swelling lust
Sucks the lewd Tuscan grape.
Yes, far from thee, these nightly vigils keep
In riot drunk, while o'er thy homely couch
Transported Hymen smiles,
Dilating joy heav'n-born.
Nor care is thine save nature's infant care,
The beauteous hopeful progeny of love,
Which lisp content, or vie
To meet the envied kiss.
Thine is no dread, unknown is horrid war,
Her loud shrill trumpet brac'd with sounding death,
And conflagrating clash
Of host to host oppos'd;
Thine, lovely maid, thine is the peaceful state,
The good old Saturn and our fathers sway'd,
'Ere the inhuman forge
Labour'd with monstrous birth,
'Ere war'd with impious and gigantic force
The daring Titans 'gainst the sons of Jove,
Scaling on hills and rocks
The empyreal heav'nly walls.
Thine lovely maid, thine is the peaceful state,
For man first destin'd when that man was pure,
Pure and unstain'd, and form'd
Bright image of the gods.
Then heav'ns fair sons oft left their starry thrones
Familiar, with his pleasing converse pleas'd,
Chaunting in measures sweet
The consecrated hymn.
By thee thus seated, and like him compos'd,
Eager and early with the dappl'd morn
O let me prostrate fall,
And breathe the incens'd pray'r.
Then to the chace and vigorous exercise
(For rosy ruddy health's the child of toil)
My Spartan hounds convene,
And mount the fav'rite steed;
Or in the spiry shade or shadowy grot,
At noon secreted from the solar heats,
In meditation wrapt
O let, O let me stray;
At eve with thee I'll tune the oaten stop,
Or wooing nature, mark her various pow'rs,
The ebb, the flow of tides,
And change of night and day,
And Spring with tresses bath'd in April tears,
Summer with sun-beat face, and Autumn kind,
The youngest, far the best
Of all the seasons fair.
Hence taught from nature's simple page, I draw
More than voluminous learning ever taught,
Or whilome feign'd by Greece,
Or Egypt's mystic lore.
Then lead, chaste goddess, to that blest recluse,
Where reason, science, friendship, rose-lip'd health,
The pastimes soft regale
And lull to calm repose.
And where sweet youth, sweet care, contentment sweet,
And all to virtue, love, and peace allied,
Gay in immortal spring
Confess thy bounteous hand.
