Before you song or subject chuse,
Take sack &mdash; to warm the gentle muse&mdash;
The Heliconian stream is dry,
Since Dryden threw the laurel by.&mdash;
Then let Court air be breath'd upon ye,
As mild as milk, as sweet as honey!
High sounding words, in time of war,
Take &mdash; and dash Hector from his car&mdash;
Call up the Gods of antient Rome,
To live among us, as at home&mdash;
To fight our battles, guard our land,
At all times ready to our hand!
Old Neptune on his Dolphin's back,
Shall rise to taste the Laureate's sack;
And when the smoke of war is over,
And sighing armies land at Dover,
To drill out life in hungry ease,
And take the bread without the cheese&mdash;
When hosts of men, in solemn pride,
Are sent the question to decide;
Whether we shou'd eat eggs at all,
Or break the big end or the small;
Or whether &mdash; for 'tis just the same&mdash;
So sects grow hostile for a Name&mdash;
Friends, willing to supply our want,
Should feel that we can make them grant
When all these quirks are render'd plain,
By millions spent, and myriads slain&mdash;
Myriads belov'd by Him, who made 'em,
Who grieves that man should thus degrade 'em,
When all this horrid scene is past,
And Reason rules the realm at last;
Then, free from victory and plunder,
And guns, and drums, and hostile thunder,
Let the Muse lay her head at rest,
"Lapt in Elysium" of the blest;
'Till sleep and gentle dreams inspire,
Soft, happy scenes &mdash; to suit the lyre;
In time of Peace &mdash; the same as those,
Dan Homer for Olympus chose,
When Nectar made their Godships merry,
Or Virgil drew beyond the ferry,
Beds of "ever-blooming flowers,"
Water-falls, and "arching bowers,"
Fruits that Italy adorn,
And all the stores of Amalthea's horn,
Pindaric measure must be trod,
With, or without, the spirit of a God&mdash;
The varied verse adapted to the music&mdash;
Long, and quite loud enough to make a Jew sick&mdash;
Or strain'd to fill an English brain,
With all the extacy of pain!
The less of sense, the better sound&mdash;
'Till nothing but the voice is found;
To trace the meaning to the head,
Of what is sung but never said,&mdash;
The Ode as void of ev'ry passion&mdash;
From modern Italy the fashion&mdash;
As if the mind of man was free,
From Faith, and Hope, and Charity.
And all the affections, felt of yore,
When Shakespeare drew forth Nature's store,
And taught us what was good and ill,
By paintings of the human will,
In shapes, as bright and various as the rays
Of yonder sun, that gilds our summer days!

Not so now the Muse employ'd,
To fill up the aching void&mdash;
Jerks ingenious, quavers quaint;
Softness sickening to a Saint,
Airs that frill along the sky,
And make you neither laugh nor cry,
Sad nor merry, wise nor witty,
So improving is the ditty!
Fit for Fairies on a green,
Dancing in the moon-light sheen.

Rouse, Britons!  rouse; nor longer love the song,
Which from your reason hurries you along&mdash;
When Poets praise the birth of Britain's King,
Or the New-year invites the Bard to sing,
Let sense, and duty, from the heart inspire
The Poet's labours with a Poet's fire!

Britannia's Monarch merits praise,
But let the rite be giv'n
As 'twas in Spenser's happier days,
The flowing breath of Heav'n!

With ease and innocence he swept the lyre,
As if with smiling pleasantry he play'd;
Yet mark the lay, it glow'd with heav'nly fire,
And pleas'd full well his Queen, the royal maid,
While all her sense and prowess he pourtray'd!
Ne did he strive from Nature's lore to stray,
Ne dress his Muse in ancient coat of mail,
To stop unlearned wight to sing his lay;
Like modern Bards, who, deaf to pity, chuse
In rusty vice to squeeze their sickly fainting muse!

If the New year, and prospect of the Spring,
Call forth the Bard to laud earth's nobler King,
Let Milton's lay the Laureate's pencil guide
To paint all Nature in her rising pride!
Superior gratitude to Love Supreme
Should warm our hearts, and vibrate on the theme!
Cold as pendent links of ice,
Should the Bard within his vice
Distant images of good,
Classic figures, form of wood,
Send him to the Italian shore,
Not bless'd as in the days of yore,
When Rome her Virgil and her Tully saw,
Not beardless Orators, nor Bards of straw!
When the Great Maker touch'd his hallow'd tongue,
Big with the God the mighty Pindar sung!
