Mild shone the vernal evening bland,
And scarce a zephyr sigh'd.
When thus to hail my native land
In patriot strains I tried:
What bliss, unrival'd soil, is thine!
What charms on every side combine!
Hark!  what accents strike mine ear!
"Plenty, plenty triumphs, here:"&mdash;
Hill and valley, wood and plain,
All proclaim far Freedom's reign;
Genius and taste they sons endue;
And oh, ye matchless nymphs, what beauties bloom in you!

Nor less the virtues grace thy youth,
The virtues all are thine;
Untainted honour, artless truth,
And charity benign:
Where else arise such kind abodes
For all whom fell disease corrodes?
Lo, the gates wide open stand,
Enter in, afflicted band!
Science there, with potent balm,
Waits each throbbing pang to calm;
O, ne'er avert thy partial smile,
Philanthropy divine, nor quit thy fav'rite isle!

What nation else so nobly pleads
The cause of injur'd right;
So execrates oppressive deeds,
And arbitrary might?
Scarce had I spoke, when o'er my view
A sudden veil soft slumber drew;
Sinking on a flowery bank,
Underneath a willow lank,
By a shrilly-tingling sound
Sweetly lull'd, I press'd the ground;
But fancy still attending, kind,
With many fairy forms amus'd my wond'ring mind.

What means yon cloud, with skirts so bright,
Slow fading o'er the hill?
The sun has long withdrawn his light,
And every gale is still:
Perhaps it bears some courteous sprite,
That comes to set the wanderers right,
And with kindly streaming rays
Cheer the dark and tangled ways,
Till again the lunar beam
Light the wood, and gild the stream;
Or rather, of empyreal race,
Some friendly pow'r descends on embassy of grace.

Near and more near the vision drew,
Till o'er my head it hung;
Prone on the green turf at the view
My trembling limbs I flung:
But soon a voice, more softly clear
Than fairy songs, dispell'd my fear:
"Rise, behold the friend of man,"
Thus th' angelic voice began;
"Lo, I come, with soften'd light,
Temper'd to thy weaker sight;
Fear not, for ever by my side
Benevolence and Peace and Liberty abide."

I look'd &mdash; and lo!  in white attir'd,
A female form reclin'd,
Whose looks th' expanding heart inspir'd
With love of purest kind:
Yet in those looks was plainly seen
A deep regret that prey'd within;
Sudden from within the cloud
Harmony celestial flow'd;
Shapes cherubic round me play'd,
Heav'nly fragrance fill'd the shade;
While thus the pow'rs, in accents mild,
"Philanthropy, thou seest Religion's duteous child."

"When interest first, and discord dire
Usurp'd the mental throne,
From Heav'n's blest bow'rs th' Almighty Sire
In pity sent me down.
But, ah!  in vain I fondly strive
To keep the sparks of love alive:
Pride, impatient of control,
More and more obdures the soul;
Avarice vile, my deadliest foe,
Daily finds her empire grow;
And, oh!  I see, with grief sincere,
Still foremost in her train Britannia's sons appear!

"See where on Afric's groaning coast,
The nation prais'd so high,
(Say wilt thou yet that nation boast?)
These fellow-mortals buy.
Exil'd from all that gladdens life,
Friends, parents, country, children, wife,
Seest thou not the drooping band?
Lo, they drag them to the strand!
Now the breeze distends the sail;
Hear'st thou not the frantic wail?
Happy, if, on the wat'ry way,
Each stifled wretch expires, to sharks a destin'd prey!

"Turn next to Eastern climes thy view,
Ah climes remote in vain!
Ev'n there thy sons, O Albion!  too
Pre-eminence maintain;
But 'tis in fraud's felonious feats,
But 'tis in rapine's blood-stain'd seats:
Lo, where'er the strangers tread,
Grim extortion rears his head;
Rape and murder swell the train;
Ravenous pillage sweeps the plain:
While close behind, with tyrant scorn,
Fell famine taunting points at Plenty's ransack'd horn.

"Yet these are they whose boundless worth
Leaves all applause behind:
These are th' enlighten'd of the earth,
The liberal and the kind:
Yes, these are they, who, void of shame,
The nicest sense of honour claim;
Burst, ye winds, your rocky caves,
Whelm their treasures o'er the waves,
That the glitt'ring guilty spoil
Ne'er may reach their natal soil,
To shut corrupted judgment's door,
And say to injur'd right, submit, for thou art poor.

"But now adieu, I haste to know
If yet one breast remains,
Which, like my Burke's, th' exalted, glow,
The zeal of humane retains."
She ceases &mdash; lo, she fleets away,
Ah yet awhile, celestial, stay!&mdash;
Vain my pray'r &mdash; along the skies
Swift the lessening glory flies;
Faint and fainter fast  it grows;
Now the last &mdash; last glimpse I lose&mdash;
Yet still it shines in fancy's eye;
Still on his listening ear th' etherial accents die&mdash;
