While wintry gales around the cottage whistle,
An' Phoebus far to southern climes retir'd,
I thus attempt another short epistle;
You have it here just as the muse inspir'd&mdash;
Ah!  was the limner at this season fir'd
Wi' a spark o Fergusson, or Burns's flame!
Nae ither boon aff Heaven should be desir'd,
That I might boast a meritorious claim
To unfading bays, and everlasting fame!

Thrice famous Ferguson!  old Scotia's joy!
That erst melodiously, sae aft by turns,
Atun'd thy reed to charm the list'ning fry;
My muse tho' distant far in sorrow mourns,
And with thy bauld successor, famous Burns,
Laments thy premature untimely fate&mdash;
Tho' now thy soul with heavenly ardour spurns
All earthly joys, with glory flush'd elate,
Yet Heaven might spar'd thee to a longer date.

But Fate unkin'ly did at first ordain
To give me being in an humbler sphere:
By far the "meanest of the muses' train,"
In life's low vale yclep'd a son of care&mdash;
Expos'd to gust o' Fortune's blast severe:
Beneath the glint o' an unlucky star;
With Poverty and Want, fell luckless pair!
I wage a fruitless, and perpetual war;
Hope flies in view, but keeps her distance far.

But why thus glooming cherish discontent?
Or muttering here arraign the wise decree:
I'll soothe a tune out o'er the heath'ry bent,
And henceforth thoughtless, strive content to be:
I'll ne'er pretend, sweet Burns!  to vie with thee,
Thy soft, descriptive quaint, auldfarrant strain,
Where sweetest harmony and sense agree
To charm the heart &mdash; a height the which t' obtain
Nae sooner I attempt, than down I hurl again!&mdash;

What tho' like Burns I canna pour the lay!
Avails it ought to sit an' thra' my mow&mdash;
Because no laurel meed or comely bay,
Nor holly e'er shall rustle on my brow.
In Spring and Simmer whar the hawthorns grow,
I'll oft retire an' chaunt my humbler tale:
O whar the murmuring, mazy streamlets flow
In sweet Meanders thro' the corny dale,
Retir'd I'll sing till evening shades prevail.

Let pride swol'n criticks urge their spitefu' scoff,
And busy censuring, a' my conduct blame;
And fickle, superficial friends draw off,
Whose minds ay waver with the lunar gleam,
While mine remains, and ever will the same;
E'en pryin' time in me no change shall find:
Alas!  of friend that e'er he bore the name,
That thus would change, or to luke-warmth incline,
For sure his breast did ne'er the glow confine.

Hail, friendship!  flowery tie of social souls!
O jewel precious!  hardly to be found!
From's breast remov'd, far distant as the poles,
Where self and sordid guile for ay abound.
Alas!  to such, I'm now a burthen grown!
They shun my converse, in a sober hour!
And they who erst have so much kindness shewn
Detest the shade of Damon's humble bower&mdash;
And every interview grown cold and sour!

Well since 'tis so, retir'd within myself,
I'll sing my sonnet to the lonely glen;
Farewell ye worthless, every trustless elf!
Henceforth secluded from the ways of men,
Calm and serene life's sober day I'll spend,
Infamous, low, unheeded and unkent:
Despite the world I have one honest, friend,
Which Heaven, all thoughtful, has in pity sent,
To sooth my soul &mdash; and bid me be content.

Come tune your pipe my L&mdash;, an' gi' us a spring,
For nane o' a' the herds like you can play;
Your flowing numbers meikle pleasure bring
An' keep my cankering, careful thoughts at bay:
Let criticks censure, taunt an jeer away&mdash;
Ne'er let a pedant's frown your muse affright;
While approving Nature owns the untaught lay,
What need we fear from pride, disdain, or spite?
As on we press, exulting, led by Nature's light.

Farewell my much esteem'd familiar friend,
May wisdom guide you thro' this vale of care:
May smiling health your days and nights attend,
And happiness caress you ever, late and air',
Of every comfort may ye have a share&mdash;
Sae will your seasons here right smoothly move;
And whan ye quat this dinsome, justling sphere
May Angels bear ye to the fields above,
There with the Seraph trains for ay to sing an' rove.
