The clock struck one &mdash; that awful hour
When mortals feel thy sov'reign pow'r,
O Morpheus, and each wretch below
Awhile forgets his daily woe,
Fast fetter'd in thy pleasing chains;
While universal silence reigns:
Save where the stretching Lacqueys yawn,
Impatient wishing for the dawn;
And curse their Lady and Quadrille,
Their source of plagues, their source of ill;
Or where the well-barr'd doors resound,
Disturb'd by watchmen's nightly round,
To tell what weather, how time goes,
And guard us both from fire and foes.
Or flush'd with Bourdeaux and Champagne,
The rake forth sallying with his train,
Big for the adventures of the night,
Undaunted meeets th' approaching fight,
Falls on, is drub'd, and runs away.

Then 'twas, on Pillory hung forlorn
Jack-Boot (by day the public scorn)
From leathern lungs with deep-fetch'd groan
In plaintive strains began his moan:
"What, tho' with strong ambition fir'd,
My breast to favour erst aspir'd,
While I the steps of power ascending,
The Courtiers to their idol bending,
I grew by daily, vile aspersion,
The public hatred and aversion.
But why this clamour and uproar,
For that which others did before?
For homage, reverence, adoration,
In ev'ry age, in ev'ry nation,
Were claim'd by the exalted station:
And shall each base-born son of rhime,
Swell ev'ry action into crime?
Set in a note-book ev'ry thought?
And with rank spleen and malice fraught,
Presume on characters to sport,
And brand the vices of the Court?
Your men of genius, and of wit,
Who Satires printed, Libels writ,
Shall not dire vengeance swift pursue?
I cannot bear the scribbling crew.&mdash;
Dear trusty Pill'ry, firm support
To Statesmen, and intrigues of Court!
Justice to thee alone belongs,
Redress my grievances and wrongs!"

The Pill'ry then from heart of oak
With conscious pride indignant spoke.

"First of the forest once I rank'd,
No firmer timber ever plank'd,
Of honest-hearted British growth,
True to my King and Country both;
A monument of wrath I stood,
To brand the knave, redress the good;
But, I must own, like faithless men
I've been perverted now and then.
What wonder? &mdash; if of old respected,
I have of late been too neglected,
For rare renown'd my front appears,
Distinguish'd with a pair of ears.
More seldom claims the mangled nose,
The surgeon's fee, I now suppose.
The noses now of first-rate knaves
Are carry'd with them to their graves,
And starting 'bove their coifs you meet
A length of ears in ev'ry street,
Which, were we but allow'd to sue,
The Devil and I could claim our due.
The Judge, and not the Culprit mounted,
Would be the greater justice counted.
But prithee, friend, what makes you sick?
You're sore, I fear, and therefore kick.
Heaven gives you pow'r above the rest,
Like heav'n then succour the distrest.
Humble the haughty pride of France,
Old England's glory still advance;
Her anchor'd ships to India send,
And commerce o'er the world extend.
Such glorious actions add a grace,
Which time, nor envy can deface.
But on ambition's tott'ring tower
Uprais'd, you thence exert your power,
To gratify your own desire,
And to no other end aspire;
Then your own coffers to enlarge,
Unfaithful to the public charge,
Forsake the steps old Patriots trod,
While flatt'rers tremble at your nod;
If then some honest son of rhime
Dares to reproach you with your crime,
Whose bosom warm'd in virtue's cause,
Dares to defend her ancient laws;
That calls for vengeance at his hand:
'Tis justice then, for, e'er abash'd,
Vice must be ridicul'd or lash'd.
'Tis justice then unsheathes her sword,
Nor spares the Peasant, nor the Lord."
