As frigid winter had the fields forsook,
And grumbling northward far his passage took;
What time the bawmy spring began to flower
Her humid fragrance over lawn and bower:
When as the morning o'er the valley glow'd,
And all the beauties of the season show'd
In rosy health, and bloom of youthful pride,
Two smiling shepherds, on Lifle's verdant side,
The while their bleaters brouz'd the green along,
Thus pour'd, in artless guise, th' alternate song.

THYRSIS.
Now Phoebus mounting, glads the circling sky,
And bright with dew the spreading meadows lie:
The tuneful larks, on struggling pinions borne,
Pour exultations thro' the scenes of morn:
The early day's man to his labour bends,
While to the clouds his cottage smoak ascends;
The woodland choirs resume the vernal song,
And youthful shepherds to the mountain throng:
While aged Hobbinol puts out his cows,
And lonely drives them o'er the foggy knows;
To yonder height my Damon, let us go,
And count the beauties of the vale below.

DAMON.
The blackbird whistles 'mong yon distant trees:
How sweet the hawthorn scents the early breeze!
The modest primrose rises in the vale,
And opening daisies paint the sunny dale;
What tuneless shepherd would refuse to sing
In praise of Nature and returning spring?

THYRSIS.
The cuckoo coos unseen in yonder hedge;
The swallow twitters from the cottage ridge
The mellow mavis sings in yonder grove,
And all is harmony, and all is love.

DAMON.
Behold the sun has chas'd the mist away,
And gives his radiance to the smiling day:
The thoughtful bees forsake the shelter'd hive,
And o'er the fields in wanton circles drive;
Adown yon glen, where flows the bick'ring Burn,
In many a pleasing and romantic turn,
The youngster strays, thro' hazle bowers in quest
Of primrose play-things, and the black-bird's nest:
The rural maidens here and there are seen
To spread their linens on the grassy green;
With vocal music all the groves resound,
And universal beauty springs around.

THYRSIS.
In yonder cottage, where the hawthorns bloom,
Where hang the woodbine and the lovely broom:
In sweet retirement there my love remains,
The peerless beauty of our northern plains:
As now she o'er the stile and garden past,
A side-long-look this way to me she cast&mdash;
The joys of affluence let the rich man prove,
I'm happier far in sweet Lavinia's love.

DAMON.
My Delia's beautiful, and kind as she,
In her soft bosom, I'm as blest as thee:&mdash;
Her face is fairer than the face of May,
Where loves and graces thro' the flow'rets play.

THYRSIS.
I own thy Delia is exceeding fair,
But my Lavinia blooms beyond compare:
Her auburn locks in waving ringlets flow
Around her face, where love and beauty glow.

DAMON.
Last night I met my sweet in yonder grove,
Where soft, unseen we sat and whisper'd love;
Full long we talk'd and kiss'd and kindly toy'd,
And every bliss which lovers know enjoy'd.

THYRSIS.
Sweet over vernal vale and blooming heath,
The noon-tide gales of balmy Summer breathe!
Tho' sweet the various scenes of summer be,
Lavinia's smiles are far more sweet to me!

DAMON.
Full well I mind the dear, the happy place,
Where first I saw my Delia's lovely face&mdash;
The daily arbour, and the spreading tree,
Where first she told me that she fancied me.

THYRSIS.
Tho' small my flock, I'm every right content,
No herd more happy on the breezy bent:
I never wish beyond my humble sphere,
My sheep and my Lavinia's all my care.

DAMON.
The wormwood plant shall steal the bean's perfume,
And fragrant roses on whin-bushes bloom;
The foaming floods forget to seek the sea,
My dearest Delia when I'm false to thee.

THYRSIS.
Than light-heart lambs that scud the flow'ry lawn,
Than lays of lav'rocks at the early dawn,
That thrustle's music from the evening spray,
My sweet Lavinia's many times more gay.&mdash;
How could I sing of her the whole day long?
No other muse should e'er inspire my song:
Her blooming image steals upon my sight,
And fills my soul with rapture and delight.

DAMON.
So I with pleasure, ev'ry day would sing&mdash;
But hark, the village bell beings to ring;
Within an hour I'll meet my Thyrsis here,
Meantime I'll homeward to my breakfast cheer.
