The dew fell gently o'er the nibbling flock,
And silent evening spread her sable cloak,
Down cour'd the lark, that sweetly pip'd sae lang,
And dowie owls began the sullen sang:
The downward sun had found the western sea,
And village spires bid farewell to day;
The broad-fac'd moon was just begun to edge
Her wat'ry aspect chequer'd thro' the hedge:
When Willy met his Phoebe in the grove,
And thus in artless strain disclos'd his love.

WILLY.
While dusky shades the flow'ry dales invest,
And evening Songsters hop away to rest,
Here, far retir'd, my Phoebe, let us prove
The joys that flow from pure, from virtuous love.
Hark, how afar in yonder blooming vale,
Lone echo answers to the clam'rous rail:
While to the grateful sense spontaneous borne
O'er many a vernal bank and field of corn,
On musky pinion of the gentle gale,
The balmy fragrance of the golden vale.
Hark, how unseen, in yonder alder mead,
The tuneful Thyrsis plays his oaten reed,
In fair Lavninia's praise he pours the lays,
Lavinia's kindness all his pains repays:
I, by my Phoebe's side, am happier far
Than gold-adorned birth-day monarch's are.

PHOEBE.
Ah!  men well know to con deceitful songs,
And smooth with flatt'ry their alluring tongues:
Their subtle baits around, they careful lay,
Poor thoughtless, simple females to betray:
They'll smile and sigh, and tease us for consent,
But soon as e'er we are the fools to grant,
With the next fairer face they'll soon be ta'en,
And laughing, leave us to remorse and pain;
But Phoebe's serious when in truth she says
She takes not Willy to be one of these.

WILLY.
Ah!  woe betide the shepherd that can feign
The studied falshood of dissembled pain!&mdash;
Ah!  Phoebe, never wi sic thoughts upbraid,
For while the swallow skims the dewy glade;
While sooty black-birds seek the matted bush,
And in the hazle pipes the mellow thrush;
While bees delight their balmy food to glean
From show'ring woodbine, and the fragrant bean,
While clam'rous rooks frequent the sullen grove,
Believe me Phoebe, that I'll constant prove.

PHOEBE.
Now trust me Willy, since you here impart
The artless language of an honest heart,
(Dissimulation's altogether vain)
With you I'll be as unreserv'd and plain.
My simple soul, that ever will be true
Was ty'd to your's, and long before you knew;
Full well I mind when but of tender age,
Your winning ways did soon my heart engage:
When on the green with innocence we play'd,
Or gather'd gowans in the summer shade,
Thy manners guileless still delighted me,
And still my fancy, Willy follow'd thee.

WILLY.
Now smile ye loves, ye rural graces throng,
And give new ardour to my simple song:
In golden hue, ye moon-light mountains glow:
In tuneful cadence, all ye fountains flow:
Ye homely vales your waving scenes extend,
And all the beauties of the season blend;
Ye nodding minstrels, on the dewy spray,
In Phoebe's praises raise the morning lay;
Let mavis' music and the cuckoo's song
In Phoebe's praises sound the whole day long;
Away base wealth, with all thy yellow store,
My Phoebe loves me &mdash; and I ask no more.
Thus spoke the joyous youth &mdash; they kiss'd and parted,
And sev'rally thro' the shades, home happy hearted.
