This lonely cot, that lately rear'd its head,
The pride of cottages upon the plain,
Is by the trampling, all destroying tread
Of many years, brought nigh the ground again.

Consign'd to desolation's dreary sway,
By the all subduing, tyrant hand of time:
Here let the muse in lowly guise essay
To paint its ruins in a piteous rhyme.

Behold, all ragged, crumbling to the ground,
The roofless, joyless, weather-beaten walls!
Where the humble guest a ready shelter found
Now "with each rainy blast decaying falls."

And see the lonely, bleak, forsaken hearth,
Where bleezing fire has oft repell'd the frost:
Where oft in harmless humble joyous mirth
The rural circle many an hour has lost.

Hard by this hallan in his humble chair,
Releas'd from labors of the weary field,
Far, far remov'd from city's din and care,
The toilworn tenant often found a bield.

Here careful matron, all the live long day,
Has ply'd the wheel with ever eydent hand,
While sportive younglings, innocently gay,
Frisk'd o'er the green, an ever mirthful band.

Thrice happy state!  unknown to scepter'd kings,
A bliss, which wealth, or power but seldom knows,
Content unsullied, as the crystal springs
Whose limpid water thro' the landscape flows.

In yonder corner of the well-known room,
Once stood the humbly neat, convenient bed:
How chang'd!  into a solitary gloom!
To sauntering sheep a cold and roofless shed.

Remembrance calls up many a pleasing scene
Of days and merry nights, long gone and past;
Now all extinct!  as if they ne'er had been&mdash;
Both spence and kitchen gloom a chearless waste.

Behold where once the useful garden smil'd,
With every needful root and wholesome green,
Ah!  dire contrast!  become a shapeless wild,
Where nought that's pleasing can at all be seen.

All in the shade of yonder bushy briar,
Emerging quick, the crystal fountain sprung,
Where unmolested, in their passage clear,
The limpid waters thro' the pebbles sung.

The once sweet margin deck'd with daisies gay,
By wandering cattle now all trodden down:
"Half choak'd the waters work their weedy way,"
Where filthy frogs in multitudes abound.

Withdraw my muse, nor longer here deplore,
In pensive wise alone, the cottage lost:
A very few revolving seasons more,
Will lay us all among our kindred dust.

Then let us here our precious hours employ
In true religion's graceful pleasing way;
That as our dissolution draweth nigh,
Our hopes may strengthen as our frames decay.
