Night, deepest night o'er all the boundless wild
Her solemn glooms, her blackest vail has spread;
And the lorn Indian, Nature's suffering child,
Shrinks shivering to his frail and humble shed.

Loud howls the wind along the uncultur'd shore,
Where mighty lakes through narrow limits flow;
Opposed in vain, the torrent foams and roars,
And joins with ERIE'S stormy waves below.

Beyond the stream an ancient forest lays;
Now its tall trees in verdant pride aspire;
Now, from some vagrant spark's expanding blaze,
O'erwhelm a region in a sea of fire.

Lo, by the conflagration's lurid gleam,
Fast where the rapid river murmuring flows,
Releas'd from giddy Life's illusive dream,
Two hapless warriors in the dust repose.

Sway'd by a youthful ardour of command,
Or thirst of fame, they sought this hostile shore:
Elate with hope they left their native land,
But left, ill-fated, to return no more.

Where the raised earth marks out each narrow cell,
They sleep, unconscious, in their lowly bed;
Nor even the loud terrific savage yell
Invades the silent slumbers of the dead.

Victims of savage fraund and vengeful ire,
Here CAMPBELL and DALYELL obscurely rest:
Yet shall their fate a pitying pang inspire,
And rouse to sympathy the feeling breast.

Flowers of the desert, here your odours shed;
With fairest verdure here expand your bloom,
That no unhallowed feet, with impious tread,
Deface a vestige of the mournful tomb.

Another Chief demands the votive lays;
For still, whate'er the colour and the birth,
The impartial Muse a willing tribute pays,
Applausive numbers to heroic worth.

Not LOGAN'S fame should e'er the verse inspire;
LOGAN, undaunted in the martial strife;
But, more ferocious than the tyger-sire,
From his own infant crush'd the guiltless life.

A nobler soul, inflam'd with patriot zeal,
With generous view th' exalted purpose plann'd,
To join the scatter'd tribes for gen'ral weal,
Repel invasion, and retrieve the land.

Wide and more wide expands the patriot flame,
And the rous'd nations feel th' incentive glow:
Vain, Chieftain, all thy prowess  &mdash; vain thy fame&mdash;
The dastard hand of Treach'ry lays thee low!

In distant lands unfriended he expires;
Yet each fierce OTTOWA that fights and bleeds,
Or sinks the prey of agonizing fires,
Shall boast, O PONDIAC, thy vengeful deeds!

Far in the lonely woods' sequester'd shade,
Or on the margin of the stream they lie;
Yet for the valiant, the ill-fated dead,
The Traveller shall stop, and breath a sigh.
