Oft, musing, o'er some Sonnet, long I sit,
Searching for Rhimes, reluctant to my Call;
With Scotch, Rapee, or Spanish Snuff, I try
(For Snuff's a great Provocative to Wit,
The Muses stuff it in such measure in,
That you may know a Poet by his Nose)
To give my coming Wit an easy Birth.

By Snuff reliev'd (Great Midwife of the Brain)
My steril Muse gives timely Hopes of Fruit,
Imagination points a Sentence good,
Or Rhime harmonious, or a hint of Wit;
But e'er my Pen at Paper does arrive
'Tis vanish'd all in Air!  unsetled State!

Then, stung with Anger, from my Stool I rise,
And with Heroic Strides, and Tragic Gait,
Strut Wild and Discontented round the Room.
A Room!  Alas, it scarce deserves the Name!
Rather a Vermin-Warren; hateful Place!
And I the Hunter of the filthy Game.
The Mice in Squadrons dire, march o'er the Floor,
Squeaking they pass, Impatient for a Meal;
A Crust, if Chance affords, O Fortune rare!
Then Civil Wars amidst their Legions rise;
Then Mice on Mice, in Combat bloody fall,
And with their dying Screams distract my Soul!
Nor can I stop th' Intruders bold Career,
For poor Grimalkin flys the starving Scene,
And sure the Mice, if Mice had any Sense,
Wou'd quit their Lodgings with the speediest Means;
For here no Coat of Cheese is cast away;
No Cupboard to enjoy my Absence in:
Nor by my Bed did Candle ever stand
To make their Revels Nightly as I Sleep.
Their noisy Visits are to me alone.

Are these Companions for the Muse, Sublime?
Nor any better does the House afford:
The lower Part (the Shop) a Barber fills,
Who Cuts, or Shaves, or (for a Penny) Bleeds&mdash;
The ragged Towel round the Shoulders tuck'd
(The same he eat his Herrings off, I swear)
With Hands begrim'd, the Lather o'er the Face
He spreads, and scratches with his Beast-like Claws:
Then strait the Razor in his Fist is lodg'd,
And while he, scraping, hovers o'er your Chin,
Of Wit, Religion, Politicks, or Laws,
Even from good Queen Bess's Days to these,
He breaths out all he ever saw or heard
And sends the gross Effluvia in your Teeth;
While from his Nose, unwip'd, the Snuff distills,
Which on his Sleeve with decent Care he wipes,
And whets his Razor on the slimy Cuff&mdash;
How many Uses Poverty has found,
Which Riches wou'd have unregarded past?

The Floor above!  Oh, Seat of Discontent!
A Husband passive, and a Rampant Wife
(The Arms of Marriage without Love and Means)
Each Glass that runs, with Matrimonial Broils&mdash;
Disturb the wish'd for Silence of the Muse:
In vain Night shuts up Phoebus' radiant Shop,
And draws the Curtains round the happy Pair:
This Wife, so zealous for her Right of Tongue,
She sets a Candle up to Quarrel by.
In vain the Husband wou'd his Evening spend
With Neighbours good, at Skettles for a Pint;
Shou'd his Virago but suspect his Joy,
Furious, with Stick or Ladle, bounce she flys,
And tips her Husband with the Pins to Earth:
If the poor Man in Pray'rs an Hour wou'd spend,
Or read the Psalms or Chapters for the Day,
His furious Dame (with Papist Zeal inflam'd)
Th' Heritick condemns with bitterest Curse,
And boasts of Service done Religion's Cause.
(Can Christians be as Barbarous as Turks?
But Papists, Turks, and Jews, are much the same;
Eager to punish, whom they can't convert.
Or, what Opinion they in publick hold
They generally are Turks, or worse at home.)

Happy the Pair in social Mildness join'd
Whose mingled Souls, in one Desire wrapt;
Improving Pleasures of each others Life;
Their Love's Effect, is Mutual, Good and Peace;
The Joy of Kindred; the Delight of Friends;
And Cause of sweet Domestic Harmony.

Above this most discordant Pair, my self,
In Room o'erlooking the broad Street, resides;
Whose Prospect not diverts me, but torments:
For at my Window as I gaping stand,
To view the happy Populace below;
While the bleak Winds stiffen to horn my Nose,
And my lank Guts for want of Meat repine;
Perchance, a Brawny Butcher stalks along,
With Beef, Sirloin or Buttock in a Tray,
Reviving hungry Notions in my Soul;
With wishing Eyes I gaze him out of Sight.
Scarce is he gone, but others fill his Place,
Or Puddings hot, or Boy with treacled Roll
Appears to mock my Emptiness a-new,
The Tantalus of this our Eating Age!
Then raving, frantic on the Bed I fall,
Where kindly, Morpheus, takes me in his Arms,
Still to torment and not to ease my Soul&mdash;
In Dreams Minerva to my Mind appears,
Not in those Shapes which formerly she wore,
But like a Loin, or Fillet, Leg, or Breast;
Or clouded in a Venison-Pasty comes;
Delirious Phantoms of an empty Stomach!
In such disorder'd State my Life rolls on!
Oft, with dejected Eyes, I turn and view
The Poems, Essays, Opera's I have wrote;
Stupendous Pile!  By Booksellers despis'd;
The last by Actors, cruelly refus'd:
O barbarous Actors!  Children of the Muse!
Knew ye but what expence of Books they cost,
How many Bards I've pillag'd for a Farce,
You cou'd not, sure, unheard, contemn my Works!
Reynard, Moliere, for Farce we daily rob;
Nor even poor Tom Thumb cou'd 'scape our Hands;
Wat Tyler too, has felt Poetic Fate,
And since his Death re-murder'd on the Stage.
Plagiarism, Doctor of the sickly Muse,
To whom our healthy Benefits we owe,
Even P&mdash; thy aiding Pow'r accepts,
And C&mdash; eats thy Profits all the Year.

And I, for Bread, must now thy help implore,
Now from old Bards, approv'd, I cull a Thought,
Transcribe their Lines, and title 'em my own,
'Till I have rais'd a Poem to my Mind,
'Tis thus the Baker on a Christmas Day,
Fliches each Pudding to his Oven's brought;
Practice as vile!  'Till by Degrees he makes
A Thrifty Pudding for himself to eat.

And who can blame the Industrious Means,
The Poet hungry, or, the Baker poor?
For few are honest with an empty Purse,
And fewer Witty when they want to Dine:
For, as the Banquet, so our Fancy swells;
Eating's the Moon of our encreasing Wit,
And if we're Dull, it is our Planet's Fault.

Whilst thus engag'd, I musing sit me down,
My Laundress thund'ring with her Pattins comes,
With Shirt new wash'd (Alas, my total Stock)
And for her Money tunes her vulgar Throat,
Discordant Sound!  O Instrument uncouth!
Nor can I do like well-fed brawny Clerks,
Who pay with am'rous Coin the Bills she brings,
And wipe off Shillings with each wanton Kiss.

My Hand into my Pocket oft I dip,
(Fearful to know how little it contains)
Four-Pence, hard Fate!  is all that I can boast;
Unhappy State!  but it is often mine!

What Succour can this Sum, minute, afford?
Can I with Four-pence ring the Tavern Bell?
Or Porter tipple, for this pittance, poor?
Even the Cooks (in Court St. Martin's call'd,
Where jut-ars'd Taylors make their mid-day Feasts)
Refuse to serve me for a Price so small:
Inhuman Cooks!  Authors of fragrant Smells!

Oh!  Ye poor Numbers of St. James's Trees,
Ye ragged Tracers of the crowded Mall,
You, who have once shon, favour'd by the Fair,
'Till Dice and Raking scoop'd your Pockets dray,
Pass not with empty Belly thro' that Court;
Least your past Sins in form of Buttock rise;
The Ghost of Plenty, you have kill'd, appear,
And so distract your craving hungry Souls!

My poor consuming Mite, I strait bestow
In outward Ornaments to deck my Frame,
In Powder, Blacking, and supply of Snuff,
The chief Ingredients of a Modern Wit,
And strongest Motives to Applause and Fame.

To Slaughter's, Tom's, or Bedford Coffee-House,
Where Politicians Wise, and shabby Wits,
In mingled Nonsense, exercise their Parts,
I hasty march &mdash; where some Poetic Friend,
Whom Fortune favours (happier than my self)
Invites me, kindly, to partake his Meat;
With many Bows the Favour I accept,
And fly to meet it with untired Steps&mdash;
There seated I begin the fierce Attack,
From Meat to Sauce, from Sauce to Meat return;
From them to pil'd up Salad I advance,
And eager, gorge variety of Food:
The Wife does in Amazement stare, to see
Her Salad ruin'd, and her Mutton gone,
And to her Husband winks the distant Eye:
He takes the hint; and kindly asks me forth
To walk, digestive, in t' adjacent Fields;
Where, bowing courteously, he takes his Leave,
With firm Resolve, never to ask me more.
Such Friends the Appetite capacious finds
Mankind, at Dinner time, avoid with Care
Such Stomachs great; nor will your dearest Friend
Invite you, kindly, to a dainty Dish.
The greasy Cook sweats double at your Sight,
And the roast Fillet quivers at your Touch;
Even the Knife its edge of Slaughter turns,
And Execution trembles to perform.
