Exalted on her ebon throne,
Sad, silent, gloomy, and alone,
Enthusiasm sits;
No joy her heavy heart can feel,
Woe on her face has set its seal,
Her baleful eye, with glances dire,
Shoots a fearful, gloomy fire
That blasts where e'er it hits.

Behold the spectre waves her wand!
Hark!  she calls her dismal band:
See!  Ignorance is foremost of the ghastly train,
The chief supporter of the tyrant's reign;
With error's mist before her eyes,
She trembling creeps or wildly flies;
Alternate in her looks appear
Presumption bold and abject fear.
Next Superstition stalks along,
Round her delusive phantoms throng,
Now demons grim with snaky hair,
Now beauteous forms of painted air;
But nought her anxious, clouded aspect chears,
She starts at those and these she boding fears.

And look where woe-worn Melancholy slowly moves;
In her gloomy, callous face
Of no soft sympathy the trace;&mdash;
Sad Solitude, alone, she loves:
Round she casts a heedless eye,
Then stops, and heaves a mournful sigh,&mdash;
To heaven she looks, but yet prefers no prayer,
For all is hopeless quite, all fixed black despair.

Whence those horrid cries?
To break her chain that raging spectre tries!
Whence that furious strife!
'Tis desperate Madness struggling for the knife!
From her frenzy'd eye
Vivid lightnings fly&mdash;
Her shackled hands she cannot disengage,
And now she sits in the fierce gloom of disappointed Rage.

But see, with visage pale and brow severe,
Stern Inquisition drags her victim there:
The woe-struck wretch, in deep despair,
Attempts not a persuasive prayer;
The hag obdurate, never hears
The suppliant's sigh or feels his tears;
Each happy, fond connection o'er,
His sad remembrance pains the more:
Snatch'd from his friends, he knows their fears,
Their boding hearts, their flowing tears;
He sees his lovely partner of each care
In wild distraction rend her hair;
Her frighted infant round her clings,
Heedless, away the lovely babe she flings;
Her piercing cries distract his madd'ning brain,
Nor can his trembling knees his throbbing blush sustain,
Senseless he falls, his clanking chains resound,
His grinding teeth imprint the shaking ground&mdash;
Again he opens a despairing eye,
Or if he hopes, &mdash; 'tis speedily to die.&mdash;
The Monster with inexorable ire,
Prepares the rack and lights the lingering fire.

Ha!  see where dreadful Massacre appears,
From earth to heav'n her hideous form she rears;
Where e'er she rolls her baneful eyes,
She spreads dismay and wild surprize&mdash;
The harpy Fiend prepares for flight;
Her huge, stretch'd, shadowy wings turn day to night:
Sear'd in her heart is pity's source,
Havock and desolation mark her course&mdash;
Nor age, nor infancy, nor sex she spares,
The blooming maid, the helpless babe, the nerveless sire she tears.
The mingled heaps she sits with exultation o'er,
Her heavy pinions drench'd with reeking gore;
To heaven she raises a presumptive eye,
Its favour claims and grins a horrid joy.

Sweet Religion, chearful mild,
Pleasure's source, and Reason's child,
Come, array'd in heavenly sheen,
Come and chear the dismal scene;
Hope, bright beaming, in thine eye,
Bid Despair and Horror fly:
Let us see thy beauteous face,
Come and dwell with human race;
Be but thou our helpmate dear,
We'll begin our heaven here.
