Your letter, Kitty, of the 13th ult,
Writ in a tender crowquill kind of hand,
Came duly by the post, and the result
Is this long letter &mdash; longer than the Strand,
And so you hint, Miss, that you understand
I have a marvellous story to relate,&mdash;
Well &mdash; you shall hear it all, &mdash; a fairy's wand
Could not call stranger things to light. &mdash; But Kate!
Truth is alone my theme, in circumstance and date!

One summer-day, in 1794,
(Magazine day) the very first of June;
The  Gentleman's was then in full church flower,
Nor dead the Universal &mdash; gone too soon!
Dull periodicals were all in tune,
And Urban then ne'er mock'd the face of Munden;
Each page was dark from morn to noon, from noon
To dewy eve, &mdash; no naughty writer punn'd in
Reviews, &mdash; and not a leaf had budded of the London!

One summer evening, when the gallant sun
Was dancing on the Severn's silver tide,
And I had trod (my tale is now begun)
With angle-rod along the water side,&mdash;
Waving, and waving free, and far, and wide,
My yellow palmer 'mid the live fly throng,
To cheat the merry trout, the speckled bride
Of my delight &mdash; sudden, the reeds among&mdash;
I paused to hear rich, and strange, and lulling song!

I tarried at the river's shallow edge,
And wound my line in, and couch'd low to hear
A soft dull voice over the hawthorn hedge,
Murmuring a magic ditty &mdash; wild and dear
The hushing music came upon my ear;
It floated, as the water at my feet,&mdash;
"That day I fish'd no more," &mdash; but, with a fear,
Coil'd down upon the grass &mdash; and thrill'd to meet
A voice so soft, and oh!  so mystically sweet!

&mdash;It pass'd away!  nor could I chuse but deem
It was a phantom voice &mdash; or voice just breath'd
By some fair thing, the creature of a dream,
Some Ariel of the moment, flower-enwreath'd,
And with its music to the day bequeath'd,
In honour of the summer. &mdash; Thus I lay
With all harsh thoughts even as a weapon sheath'd
Deep in my mind! &mdash; Lord!  what a foolish way
Boys have of drawing beauty; thinking odes, like Gray.

Albeit, I made "a lady of my own,"
(Like Wordsworth) and I crown'd her all with love,
And set her on my heart as on a throne;&mdash;
A kind of coronation, far above
That which adorn'd the Abbey's pillar'd grove
And set men feeding in the costly hall;
A coronet of water-flowers I wove,
And back'd my Pegasus, just free from stall,
Through fancied peers, and plates and aldermen, and all!

This was sheer folly &mdash; poetry; &mdash; the moon
Rose o'er the river like a crescent fair,
And silver'd every ripple, and full soon
Fill'd with soft passion'd mistlight all the air:
The trees in hallowing whispers everywhere
Bow'd as in vernal worship &mdash; and the reeds
Sang melancholy psalmody, oh ne'er
Was seen such homage &mdash; even the water weeds
Grew flowers beneath her light &mdash; (on light the green thing feeds).

The moon trod measuredly the azure skies
Amid the stars, and &mdash; but in short this moon
Beat all the moons of many centuries,
And put the fulls and halfs all out of tune.
I once upon a sabbath afternoon,
Before the sun was down, I freely own,
Saw one o'er Shrewsbury towers uprise, a boon
Of beauty to the world; but dull as stone
Compared with this, which quite a poet's lantern shone.

Poor soul!  the poets make sad work with her,
(I mean the moon) &mdash; So I shall let her pass;
I fix'd my eyes, their lids without a stir,
Full on the sky &mdash; and lay on the damp grass:
Straightway the crescent orb'd &mdash; then seem'd a glass
That mirror'd a small world as true as life,
A small mankind peopled it with a mass
As usual, of child, father, man, and wife,
And all, as usual too, loving, or else at strife!

The orb descended &mdash; mov'd &mdash; and seem'd each minute
To come upon my eyes; &mdash; until I seem'd,
Not seeing it &mdash; nor under it &mdash; but in it.&mdash;
And then I thought (I do not say I dream'd;
Because I really slept not) that I beam'd
(Not breath'd) no bigger than a long legg'd gnat&mdash;
All in such precious perfect smallness gleam'd
That life seem'd shrivel'd up; oh my cravat
Was a mere silken thread &mdash; and, had you seen my hat!

Dean Swift drew little people, but he never
Harass'd tall Captain Gulliver with one
So short as Ego (I), my eyes were ever
On my own figure, and 'twas one of fun!
I walk'd about a bit, &mdash; then tried to run,
And ran ten inches in the hour &mdash; a feat!
They thought me quite a Rayner, &mdash; when I'd done,
I look'd and saw a road, &mdash; and then a street,
With gutters very clean, and pavement very neat.

I entered a small city.  Little men
And very little women walk'd the streets;
A sort of Hyde-park corner met my ken,
With such a penny turnpike!  my two feet,
(Feet!) patted through it, and I stared to meet
A minikin kind of London &mdash; coaches &mdash; carts
And Jews and barrow-women all complete,
And little pastry-cooks with little tarts,
And butchers very small, with very small calves' hearts.

I know not what this place was call'd &mdash; of course
It was not London; but was mighty like it;
St. Paul's &mdash; the Strand &mdash; the Horse-Guards &mdash; and the Horse&mdash;
The Foot &mdash; and those that learn to lance and pike it;
The Monument so like that you might strike it,
Only no higher than a candlestick;
If any doubt me, tell them that they lie, Kate,
And I shall bear you out, &mdash; I know no trick:
Romancing (i.e. lying) always makes me sick.

I sought an inn, a tavern, an hotel,
(No matter which) &mdash; I tried them o'er and o'er!
I did not like the Brown Bear, or the Bell,
The Old Black Bull, or George and the Blue Boar:
The Swan with Two Necks tempted me full sore,
But then I fear'd two bills instead of one;
I tried the Golden Crosses by a score,
And Saracen's Heads, Belle Sauvages; but none
Pleased me, or touch'd my purse, not even the Bolt in Tun.

I took a little lodging up two pair,
In a diminutive Craven-street, &mdash; a crack,
A street of a hair's breadth, no more &mdash; and there
I straight began my best clothes to unpack,
My coat, French blue, upon my shoulders slack,
And yet a tight fit for a humble bee,&mdash;
A waistcoat, and, some other garments, &mdash; black,
Boots (like refined liquorice), and three
Shirts, six cravats, two stocks, &mdash; made all the stock of me.

I soon bethought how I should live, for all,
The very least of living things, must live;
'Tis true my gullet and my mouth were small,
And a mere nothing would repletion give:
But mites would find it difficult to thrive
Without a little mastication &mdash; cheese
Would do for me I thought; so I did hive
A minikin single Glo'ster, &mdash; and did teaze
My brain to hit some plan by which to live at ease.

Trade would not do; I hated trade &mdash; I spurn'd
The half-inch counter and the apron; bright
Within my soul poetic fury burn'd;
Homer contriv'd to live, and he did write!
Well &mdash; an heroick? &mdash; No, &mdash; or else indite
A little string of odes; &mdash; or tell Scotch tales,
Or cut out sonnets; &mdash; or with puny spite,
Point epigrams, and watch the monthly sales,
And sell them by the hundred like tin-tacks or nails.

I sat me down, and wrote a little ode
To Beauty for my bread &mdash; but it brought little;
I quite piled up a Tommy-Moorish load
Of love and moonlight, yet it fetch'd no victual;&mdash;
It really scarcely served to boil the kettle:
The Muse, like Richard, without teeth was born,
Or should have been; &mdash; her bread is never brittle,
For it is seldom broke. &mdash; I do not scorn
My ode &mdash; although the points and end of it are torn.

ODE.
Thy precious little eye,
That o'er thy tiny cheek
Shineth, to me doth speak
Of a star and a Lilliput sky.

Thy little balmy mouth,
With its little balmy kiss,
Giveth a giant bliss:
Long may it speak of youth!

Thy little little feet,
In their little Spanish shoes,
Admonish a slip-shod muse
To a pace more staid and neat.

Thy little wan sleek hand
Is polish'd ivory; chess
Might thy fingers steal, I guess,
For pawns to check &mdash; (torn.)

And, oh, thy little sweet heart,
That such havock makes with men,
Would not fit the breast of a wren,
It is such a tiny part!

This was the ode, to my landlady's daughter,
A pretty little loving lovely thing,
That brought to me each morning my warm water,
And waited like a genie on my ring;
One Friday evening she had chanced to bring
The tea-things up (she did not look amiss)
I saw a smile over her forehead wing
Its dove-like flight, &mdash; there was no standing this&mdash;
I caught her like a fly, and tore away a kiss.

Her little violet-scented lips were sweeter
And smaller than the curled rose-bud leaf;
She squeak'd and struggled &mdash; call'd me a base creature,
And seem'd to be devour'd by shame and grief:
I really thought myself a desperate thief,
And loos'd my prisoning arms, which like a spell
Had held her; off she went, and I in brief
Despondence sat, lamenting in my cell,
When in she peep'd again, and "thought I had rung the bell?"

We lov'd! &mdash; and not a pang our hearts foreboded;
The little world was all before us! &mdash; I
By day her name besonneted and oded,
And dreamt at night of her small star-like eye!
She told anon a wondrous history
Of what she was &mdash; and where I was &mdash; her pretty
And bee-stung looking lips the tale did ply,
And soon I found her marvellous learn'd and witty&mdash;
That she was but a fay &mdash; and fairy was the city!

She told me that she was no servile child,
No homely waiting-maid of Craven-street,
(Although to pleasure her enjoyment wild
She had enacted such), how trebly sweet
Her treble voice became! &mdash; I tried to meet
Her pearl-sized azure eyes, and saw them smile;
She said she was a princess, and her feet
Were brightly diamonded &mdash; I blush'd awhile&mdash;
Then stared to see the room change to a lordly pile!

For, at her bidding, quick my second pair,
With its six chairs, and feature-twisting glass,
And one poor table &mdash; vanish'd; &mdash; Heaven knows where!
And I saw all the opposite houses pass
(Like a side scene), and 'stead of them a mass
Of trees, and walks, and terraces began
To assemble at the will of this fay-lass,
And my smallclothes grew bright &mdash; and my small wan
Thin visage plump'd, and show'd an altered little man!

We sat in bright apartments (very small),
Ourselves no longer than a thin tin-tack;
And little liveried servants at her call,
Little starch'd men came, standing at her back;
We took a little something as a snack,
A blue-fly's merrythought, a bilberry ice&mdash;
A drop of ratafia, and soon the clack
Of my companion was let loose; &mdash; a slice
Of fly, with small talk season'd tasted mighty nice!

"This is my room!  This is in fact my palace,
This is my servant; (Stephen, show yourself!)
This is my &mdash; but you do not fill your chalice,"
(She said, and pass'd the bottle) "on the shelf,
That is my royal bowl, china, not delf,
(We'll squeeze a lemon into it tonight.)
This is my city &mdash; each man-jack's an elf&mdash;
These are my sovereigns." &mdash; I strain'd my sight,
And saw but yellow dust &mdash; such dust would come down light.

"My city you shall see &mdash; I'll take you through it&mdash;
To-morrow, not to-day; to-day we'll chat,
'Tis like all other bigger cities; view it,
And tell me where's better; &mdash; tell me that!
We've taxes, poets, play-houses &mdash; (now drat
The man, he has not brought the bills to-day!)
We'll go &mdash; (but I must buy you a flat hat,)
To the opera; we've a Catalani fay!
And I will get our little span-long Kean to play!"

With talk like this we reach'd the dinner-hour,
And, oh!  the comfortable cloth to view!&mdash;
The pretty pin's-head of a cauliflower,
Fish, and a breast of lamb, and one or two
Patties (not girls but tarts) and melted dew,
(No butter), and a ham from fairy pig,
And fowls, mere flea-bites, peas, and then a few
Potatoes, the best fairy-kidneys &mdash; dig
The world, you'd not find better though you might as big!

We drew the table very near the fire,
My lady drank pure water out of choice;
I tried a little Tritton's best entire,
And found the fay-stout made my heart rejoice!
Verily soon uplifted was my voice,
Strengthen'd with small strong beer and dainty food;
"Thomas, the hock! &mdash; green glasses &mdash; make less noise!
'Tis many years since this was in the wood!"
I tasted it &mdash; look'd wise &mdash; smack'd &mdash; and pronounced it good!

The cloth remov'd &mdash; the long-neck'd bottles came 
Like curious people stretching in a crowd;
And precious fruits, dwarf-apples all a-flame,
And blushing pears, sun-smitten, in a cloud
Of leaves lay nestling: &mdash; well! &mdash; I fill'd and bow'd
Over my claret to my princess; &mdash; she,
Fill'd &mdash; gave the King with three, not over loud,
Then fill'd again, and push'd the wine to me;
Begg'd me to name a friend, &mdash; and I gave Mrs. D&mdash;.

We pass'd the bottle, "not too freely" &mdash; but
So as to make our mirth and fancies tell,&mdash;
And now we schemed for some amusement; put,
Or loo, back-gammon, brag, or bagatelle;
My little stock of money went pell-mell,
For she could win; &mdash; some people would say, rob;&mdash;
I hinted at a game at cribbage, &mdash; well&mdash;
We play'd &mdash; the fives came to her in a mob,
And lauk!  How vast her luck, &mdash; 'twas ever "two for his nob!"

I soon became the pennyless prey of tick!
I left off paying, and she left off playing:
I push'd away the cards, for I was sick
Of such a cursed run of twoing, traying;&mdash;
She saw that I was hurt, and just way-laying
My lips with a sweet kiss, she laugh'd away,
And looking in my face, her face arraying
In most arch smiles, she sang, or seem'd to say,
(A wily little witch!) the song of Duncan Gray!

"Call me a poet!" (the song done) she exclaim'd!
(Poets were there like coaches hack'd and number'd),
"I'll have my little lover brightly fam'd,
And to that end his name must be encumber'd
With rhymes and measures, things o'er which I've slumber'd
Often, though woven by a fairy brain!
I'll have this little man compared with some bird
Of delicate plume! &mdash; It goes against the grain
To call these creatures up &mdash; they're such hungry train!"

Stephen, in blue turn'd up with yellow, bow'd,
Like a respectful Edinburgh Review,
Received his lady's message, hemm'd aloud,
Smirk'd sideways through his whiskers and withdrew!
He went to Grub-street, searched the famish'd crew,
Before he gave his summons to appear;
For if he called a shabby one he knew,
He might be turned into a flea, and hear
An order to hop off himself in his own ear.

One came; a lax young nobleman, a fay,
Jaundiced with moody indolence and pride,
A savage, half-inch poet, and they say,
Married (to speak more properly, allied)
To a high learned fairy; he had tried
To harbour underneath her nose loose elves&mdash;
But she rebuked &mdash; so he forsook a bride
Of such harsh morals, and he fill'd men's shelves
With lampoons on her love, so keen, they bit themselves!

He was a moody Lord, as you shall see,&mdash;
For, like the pavement at a baker's door,
He took distress of weather differently
From all around him; &mdash; others would run o'er
With tears, when he was warm and dry at core;
If they were hard and frozen, he was wet;
Apollo often damn'd him for a bore,
And all the Muses, when to chat they met,
Rubb'd with hard truths his name till it was black as jet,

But, Kate, my dear, this letter's long enough,&mdash;
So what this coroneted poet said,
And what my princess said to him, are stuff
For the next canto, or epistle; wed
This story to your memory! &mdash; I have read
All that I've writ, &mdash; and if it be not true&mdash;
I am not living, nor is Queen Anne dead!
Nor are you fair, nor is Miss Brown a Blue!
I've still some facts to state:  at present, Kate, adieu!
