The Watchman counts the Clock, while Time runs on,
The fleeting Hours pass hastily away,
And journeying down the West, the setting Sun
No longer darts its bright enliv'ning Ray.

The Face of Nature's all with Darkness veil'd,
The verdant Plains no more delight the Eye;
No Moisture from the wat'ry Deep's exhal'd,
But Vapours fall from out the humid Sky.

The Birds forsake the Plains, and haunt the Wood;
The Ox a Shelter seeks nigh some huge Oak;
The feather'd Songsters, and their chirping Brood,
Wing swift their way; the Raven's dismal Croak

Portends Events:  As the sage Matrons say,
Some Wretch must perish in the fated Cott:
Where singly the dire Bird by Chance should stray,
Inevitable Death must be the Lot.

The Bird of Pallas takes its sullen Flight;
And Bats their leathern Wings extended wide,
That shun the Day, and only fly by Night,
Break from the Covert, where they us'd to hide.

The Fish, the silent Deeps, in Search of Prey,
Skim hastily along; and, quick as Thought,
The Pike, voracious, makes the wa'try way,
Nor rests he till the flying Prey he's caught.

Bright Cynthia's Majesty in Pomp appears,
And starry Lustres make the Skies more bright:
The nightly Traveller dispels his Fears;
With chearful Steps he passes through the Night.

Through the thick Trees a pleasing Shade he views;
The trembling Leaves in gentle Whispers play;
The tufted Grass, bespangled, shews the Dews,
And glitt'ring Glow-worms light him on his way.

In solemn Silence, lo!  the World's retir'd,
And downy Slumbers wrap the Mind to rest,
Save busy Fancy, where the Soul is fir'd,
Still keeps her Flutt'ring in the thoughtful Breast.

The Fairy Train the winding Glade pursue,
With jocund Strains and merry Glee they 'dvance;
In Nut-shells drink deep Draughts of pearly Dew,
And briskly mingle in the sprightly Dance.

The melancholy Cricket, on the Hearth,
With dismal Thrill, bids the rude Clown Good-night,
Then hops to some Corner, and, in th' Earth,
Lies where he feels the friendly Warmth invite.

The purring Cat is near the Fire-side set,
And meditates the Fall of some shy Mouse;
She views her pointed Talons, sure to hit,
And calls herself Preserver of the House.

The tim'rous Hares their Forms with Safety leave,
Brush through the Covert for the new-sown Corn,
Nor fears the Snare, that would his Life deceive,
Nor hears the Beagles, nor the echoing Horn.

The subtle Foxes from their Caverns come,
With leering Glances tow'rd the Farmer's Yard,
Secure to seal the cackling Chickens Doom,
Unless the trusty Cur their Steps retard.

With awful Silence, in some lonely Cell,
The Hermit sits, by his faint, glimm'ring Light,
Hears the sweet Notes of warbling Philomel,
Who lulls the Soul with Music and Delight.

Along, the chrystal Streams in Murmurs run,
Save where a Precipice retard their Course,
With Force redoubled, there they thunder on,
And break all Bounds by their unbounded Force.

The Cock, shrill Messenger of rising Morn,
With Head reclin'd, forgets the Ev'ning Star;
Nor, watchful, rises till the Verge of Dawn,
Nor shakes his Plumes till Darkness disappear.
