To you, much sweeter than the Fish you sell,
I dedicate this rude, unpolish'd Lay;
Ah, will you wend with me my Blouzabel,
And celebrate the jolly Month of May?
Throw by your Basket, don your best Array.
Dear grey-ey'd Maid, will you the Garland bring,
Bedeck'd with Tankards sheen, and Chaplets gay,
And while in active Daunce you featly spring,
Mine be the happy Task, the scrape the tortur'd String.

Th' inactive Soldan of this neigh'bring State,
Deep in his Quiver hides his plumed Flight,
The bold Colleagues have shut their busy Gate,
And Kings, like Suns eclips'd, withdraw their Light.
Ah boots it to be great or gallant Wight!
Where, where is Caesar?  where Statira sweet?
Hurl'd from his Pomp, and in a doleful Plight
The proud Dictator's humbled in the Fleet,
And great Darius' Imp, from Garrets eyes the Street.

Now my blythe Maid her Mack'rel new doth bear,
Unchristian Fish, that nought the Sabbath heeds:
Eft on the Summit of her golden Hair
From Door to Door the captiv'd Sole she leads:
To her the Seas pay Tribute, and the Meads,
Then doth she sav'ry Cresses cull with Art,
Crops wholesome Leaves, and shuns all noyous Weeds,
And now her Cucumbers she doth impart,
Sweet as her juicy Lip, cold as her frozen Heart.

But see the Sun doth burn the brazen Sky,
The listless Chairman swings each idle Hand,
Thick Clouds of Dust inwrap the wat'ry Eye,
The Mall is fill'd with an ignoble Band,
We rush into the Waves, and quit the Land.
Th' affected Prude at ev'ry naked Man
(Who doth expose his Matters contraband)
Doth hide her Face, and the base Carl doth ban,
Nathless, the couthful Dame doth peep betwixt her Fan.

How can I live this long Vacation thro'?
In Hope of you, dear Maid, I live alone,
No Passenger comes by with dirty Shoe,
My Brush, my best Japan is useless grown.
Ah!  when will Autumn 'gin to dash the Stone,
And bring my wish'd-for Winter in the Rear,
Hark, hark, 'tis Blouzabel's delicious Tone,
Or is't the Music of a moving Sphere?
Fresh Oysters Blouzee cries, the Sound delights mine Ear.

Now drizzling Sleet and Rain comes smoaking down,
The Badges rough of a November Sky,
In muddy-Garb appears the well soak'd Town,
The Bob-wig'd Smart, and Sempstress, nothing shy,
To the next Shop for sudden Shelter fly.
With Beavers flap'd the hard Coachmen sit,
In grim Obedience yielding to the Cry
Of the bluff Captain, or substantial Cit,
Who from his leathern House doth sneer the Walking Wit.

Yet ah!  in vain I woo my frowning Maid,
To me she's colder than December's Snow,
And yet her Breast the Fires of Love invade,
To the old George she will with Carrots go,
Carrots the bold, who doth not Carrots know?
Then from this Day all Merits I disdain,
'Tis better far to die, than live in Woe,
I'll filch, or rob in Alley, Street, or Lane,
Unaw'd by Bridewell's Lash, unaw'd by Newgate's Chain.
