'Tis not the chiming in with social mirth,
'Tis not the smiling ease politeness needs,
'Tis not a seeming sense of pleasure's worth,
That tells a man is happy &mdash; the heart bleeds
In company but seldom &mdash; but it feeds
In solitude, in secrecy, on woe,
On sensibility, on fear, nor heeds
The faithful solace of those thoughts that show
How fleeting, vain, and sad is ev'ry joy below.

And such am I &mdash; for I have liv'd to wake
From  youthful dreams of happiness and peace,
To feel the ties of fond attachment break,
My spirits sink &mdash; domestic pleasures cease&mdash;
And my weak heart hath rather lov'd t' increase
Than lessen its distress, for there was none
To comfort me, none knew I sought release
From griefs and thoughts which wildly led me on,
To deeds of dark despair that mem'ry's self must shun.

And though the raging of that storm is past,
Its mighty ruffle ne'er can quite abate:
The reckless fury of that shock hath cast
A change o'er all my feelings, and what fate
May have in store I care not.  I create
No hopes, expect no joys, no happiness;
The coming doom in silence I await.
Remorse and anguish only truly bless,
And though their sting be sharp, I will not love them less.

Many a tear the cold world dream not of,
Steals down this cheek, &mdash; many a struggling sigh,
(At which deserv'd dislike perchance might scoff,)
Bursts from its prison, when no soul is nigh.
Methought that all would look with careless eye
Upon me, ne'er affection's voice beguile
My weary wand'rings, till I droop and die,
And leave to other victims th is world's guile,
The malice of its frown &mdash; the treach'ry of its smile.

But I am human &mdash; and could scarcely cope
With constant disappointment, slight, neglect,
It is a bitter thing to banish hope,
To have no home, no fire-side, to reflect
And feel that no soul loves me; o'er this wreck'd,
This broken heart, dejection stern would crave
Dominion, and with tyranny uncheck'd,
Would surely hurry to an early grave,
Him whom this tribute of affection yet may save.

For now I know that all do not condemn,
Despise, forsake.  My feelings are too keen.
Dejection's current I should aim to stem,
My lonely hours from melancholy mean;
And as I seek contentment's joys serene,
Perhaps fair hope may teach me to forget,
And kindlier whisper of some lovelier scene,
Where life's dim sun in brighter clouds shall set,
Then cheer thee, drooping heart, thou may'st be happy yet.
