Hark!  hear a solemn strain
Of swelling harmony
Glide o'er the billows of the main:
The rude winds lie
Hush'd on the beds, and hold their breaths to hear,
And now, and now, the pealing sounds draw near.
I err, or sure from Cambria's shore,
Nurse of Bards in time of yore,
Where once, with more than mortal fire,
"Mighty Mador smote the lyre,"
The strains descend &mdash; but no, no more
Shall harmony unfold her store.
"Cadwallo's tongue is cold and dead,"
And Urien sleeps on his eternal bed.
"Silent is Hoel's harp, Lewellyn's lay,"
Vocal no more since Cambria's fatal day.

What vision rises from the deep!
A hoary sage I see:
'Tis he, the Bard, 'tis he,
Who, erst, in plaintive strains, his country's woes did weep.
Upon the swelling billows born,
In robes by antient Minstrells worn,
Twixt Cambria's shore, and Ullin's plain,
In the mid-sea he rides the main.
High his port, and on his head,
An hundred winters snows are shed.
He comes to 'wake his custom'd strain,
And sing his country's woes again.
He sweeps his strings &mdash; immortal ears
Might listen from their native spheres.

"Sons of Mona &mdash; Bards arise,
Ascend, shake slumber from your eyes.
I call'd you once to weave the woof
Of Edward's fate, now firm, and proof;
I call you now, with joy to trace
A soul born to renew his race.
A Prince of Wales indeed is he,
A Prince &mdash; I read his destiny,&mdash;
Whose virtues shall attone the Crimes
Of Edward's race, to future times;
A Prince of Wales to you restored
Unlike your first Carnarvon Lord
Sprung from that scourge of angry Heaven;
Your conquering Lord in triumph giv'n;

"Say who deserves the Crown to wear?
Not he, of wild ambition heir,
Son of a ruthless bloody King,
Whose praises vultures only sing,
For many a feast of heroes slain
On Snowdons hills or Lochlin's Plain.
Not he, who snatches immature
The Sceptre, with a hand impure!
Who curses lingring times delay,
And plucks the long-wish'd Crown away,
While yet a father's quiv'ring breath
Hangs on his lips, ere cold in death.
Not he, who for himself alone,
By force or fraud ascends the Throne,
And trampling o'er his people's heads,
A band of servile courtiers leads;
A son of faction, party, power,
Too soon confess'd, in evil hour;

"He, he, who can the crown despise
Is worthy to the Throne to rise;
Who mourns the sad necessity
That raises him to high degree;
Who calm in faction's wild debate,
Nor ev'n, from youthful pride elate,
Curtail'd of right, and robb'd of pow'r,
A pageant for the idle hour,
Still deprecates the fatal day,
The warmth of friends, and factions sway.
Best omen this of future worth,
To nations, yet unborn, held forth;"

Mona to Snowdon sent the strain;
It pass'd o'er Arvon's shore,
Soft winds the accents bore,
And huge Plinlimmon's caves re-ecchoed it again.
Each sleeping Bard soon caught his prophets fire,
Again restor'd to vital breath
Started from Death,
And snatch'd his slumbring lyre.
See them from the hills descend,
Rising from the blood-stain'd plain;
See them all, their aspects bend
Towards their prophet on the main.
See IERNE'S shores too whiten;
Slow descending Bards I see;
E'en now their eyes with gladness brighten,
While their concord harps agree.

Chord warblings, hark!  I hear
Mixt strains in swarms assail my ear;
Responsive notes from Ullins plain
Echo the numbers back again.
Her Bards resound the glorious theme;
Her hills, her dales,
Her rocks, her vales,
Have caught the holy flame.
See from their dark recesses move
The white rob'd Druids of the grove,
Descending slow upon the shore,
Faint echos last responses they restore.
Ierne's sons &mdash; arise, they cry;
Attune your silent lyre,
Nor let e'en Cambria's Bards aspire
With thine to vie.
Ierne parent of the song,
Ere war, thy glades among,
Wide spreading, forc'd the holy seer to fly.

Thou Land of Saints of Soldiers late
Wilt thou not swell the choral lay,
Wilt thou not join to celebrate
A Prince, a Hero's natal day?
That hero thine adopted King,
Lord of thy choice, and thine alone;
The first whose pow'r from choice did spring,
Will old Ierne's Sons disown?
No &mdash; Albion Cambria raise your voice
Your firm and loyal hearts declare,
Ierne's Sons shall still rejoice,
Her Prince, her GEORGE'S praise to hear;
And tho' her Bards in sacred glades
No more to echo teach the song,
Yet peaceful swains, and gentle maids,
Shall still the favourite theme prolong.

Nor ever let th' auspicious day
That gave this Prince this Hero birth,
Pass, without one immortal lay,
To sound the theme to all the earth.
Ierne's, Albion's, Cambria's shore,
Shall boast their happiness in store;
Severn and Shannon now shall join,
One object shall all minds combine;
Ierne's Prince, not Cambria's now,
For first we claim the plighted vow.
For now his mind stands first confess'd,
With ev'ry royal virtue bless'd,
Try'd on a late important hour,
Above the common strife for pow'r.
And when the Sire, restor'd so late,
Must yield to the decrees of fate,
Worthy to fill a virtuous Throne,
And make that people's hearts their own.

Join then ye Bards, your vocal pow'rs display;
And let one glowing strain,
Ascend the starry plain,
And to Heaven's Portal the glad Song convey.
Hear it &mdash; ye tawny sons  of Africk's Sands;
Hear it &mdash; ye feather'd Chiefs of India's Bands
Great GEORGE was born your fetter'd limbs to free,
And break the Bonds of your captivity.
Nor, Britons, now your Arthur more bewail,
But hail this godlike youth, this genuine Briton hail!
