WEARY AND HEAVY-LADEN.
FROM THE ITALIAN OF PETRARCH.
Beneath the burden of past sin I bow,
That bands of lengthened habit closer bind.
My knees are failing by the way, e'en now;
And lo, my fell pursuer is behind!
I had a Friend &mdash; with countenance how kind!
Ineffable! &mdash; and he with help was nigh:
But he, alas, has fled. &mdash; Ah, could I find
Again that gentle hand, that cheering eye!
Yet, hark! &mdash; "Ye weary, laden heavily,
Mine be your load, and yours my yoke of love."
It is his voice, still speaking from on high!
Oh give me then the pinions of a dove!
That wishes here below so long unblest
At length may fly away, and be at rest.

THE AGED GENIUS.
FROM THE ITALIAN OF MICHELANGELO.
At length life's stormy voyage well nigh is done:
These waves shall toss my fragile bark no more.
But ah! &mdash; there waits the Judge, the unerring One,
Who shall each work, and word, and thought explore!
And is it so? &mdash; The fantasy is o'er
That made enshrined art my idol still;
And many a flying shade I chased before
As my chief good, was but a specious ill!
What if, when death hath wreaked his power to kill,
The living death beyond the grave be mine?
The pencil and the chisel have no skill
To charm such thoughts to rest: &mdash; O love divine,
Who didst spread wide thy arms on Calvary,
Be thou my refuge, Lord!  for I have none save THEE!

PRAYER.
IMITATED FROM THE ITALIAN OF MICHELANGELO.
How sweet shall be the incense of my prayer!
Since He who bids me, gives the power to pray,
I may draw near, and bring these spices rare,
That spring  not forth from my unfertile clay.
Source of al perfect gifts! &mdash; ah who shall lay
Aught at thy feet, save that by thee bestowed?
Thine is the softening dew, the quickening ray;
And thine the right to reap where thou hast strowed.
Forerunner to the purchased abode!
Oh shed thou then upon me &mdash; e'en on me,
Thy light to find, thy strength to tread the road
To where the pure in heart shall dwell with thee.
Take all thine own: &mdash; inspire, enkindle, raise,
My thoughts, my tongue, my life, to thy immortal praise!
