Where is the lovely blush that Autumn shed,
And where the beauty of the ripen'd corn,
And where those sweets which late, from Nature's bed,
In grateful fragrance, hail'd each roseate morn!

In vain, alas!  the garden's pride I trace,
In vain the boundless landscape traverse o'er!
Whilst bashful Autumn veils her beauteous face,
Fades with the rose, and dies with ev'ry flow'r!

In vain I seek, at each returning eve,
For gentle zephyrs sweetly breathing gale;
Or hope that Philomela now will give
Her plaintive sonnet, echoing thro' the vale.

No cheerful sounds assail the list'ning ear,
No fairy prospects open to the sight;
Low lies the glory of the fruitful year,
And all its blushing beauties sunk in night.

Hark!  from afar the north wind surly blows;
The vet'ran sailor hears the tempest roar,
Furls ev'ry sail, whilst all his bosom glows
With fond remembrance of his girl on shore.

Descending snow o'erclouds the face of day,
And pinching frost usurps his boundless reign;
The ploughman whistles as he plods his way,
In hopes at last his humble cot to gain.

The lisping children, at the close of eve,
Peep from the lattice, watching for their sire,
Anxious who first the infant kiss shall give,
Or share his fondness round the blazing fire.

Let not Ambition mock my humble song,
Nor scorn the stories of the lowly swain;
For oft to them the purest joys belong
Of health and peace, sweet tenants of the plain.

Nor let not Affluence with-hold her store,
For keen's the wind, and piercing is the cold;
Nor rudely chide Affliction from the door,
But heal the sorrows of the young and old.

Perhaps some hero mourns his hapless fate,
And seeks from charity a little bread;
Shews every wound, or pensive does relate
How oft he fell among th' embattled dead.

Some drooping genius, whose enraptur'd breast
Glows with a Shakespeare's strong poetic flame,
Inglorious dies, like Chatterton, oppress'd,
Or hapless Savage of immortal name.

Be thine the task, O Affluence!  to heal
The laurel'd hero and the drooping sage;
Let bashful Merit thy kind influence feel,
And other Shakespeares yet may bless the age.

And, O, may DELIA!  whether falling snow
Or beating rain detains thee from my sight,
Send but one kiss, my breast shall fondly glow&mdash;
Heave but one sigh, my soul shall feel delight!

I wait impatient for th' appointed hour,
When I shall meet my DELIA in the lawn,
And see the sun-beams faintly round the bow'r,
Where oft we've met to greet the dew-clad dawn!

Near Boyne's fair stream I've rear'd my humble cell,
And deck'd my garden with each choicest flow'r,
Say, lovely DELIA!  will you deign to dwell,
Thro' life's dull round, in this sequester'd bow'r.

No storms shall fall on thy defenceless head,
No grief assail thee, nor no woes distress;
Angels shall  hover round thy peaceful bed,
And blissful seraphs tend thy steps to bless.

I'll kiss the tear when falling from thine eye,
And soothe disquiet from  thy love-lorn breast;
Together thus we'll live, thus calmly die,
And in one grave enjoy eternal rest.

And oft, at peep of dawn, when spring appears,
The happy villagers in pairs shall meet,
And cull the beauties of each op'ning year,
To deck our grave with every blooming sweet.

And lightly treading o'er the sacred turf,
Shall plight their vows of constancy and truth,
And, sighing, emulate my DELIA'S worth,
And learn, like me, to love thro' age and youth.
