I.
Ruin seize thee, Despot vile!
Confusion on thy banners wait:&mdash;
Thy blood-stained ensigns o'er this isle&mdash;
Ne'er calm the air in triumph state,
No!  nor [illegible] nor shivering sail
Nor e'en thy fortune, Tyrant, shall avail,
Shall save the from the hostile fear
Or Britain's Lion!  Britain's Tar!
Such are the sounds that o'er thy humbled pride,
Insulting Corsican!  shall spread dismay,
As, on Atlantic's blushing tide,
You fly with shatter'd fleet away&mdash;
Whilst Brunswick glaring in malignant glance
Frowns o'er thy crest, and points his dazzling lance.

II.
On a cliff, whose haughty brow
Rears o'er old Dover's foaming strand,
Rob'd in the crimson garb of war,
With eagle eye Britannia fair doth stand
(In tresses loose, her golden hair
Streaming, like meteor, to the troubled air)
And with a sceptered wand, and prophet's fire,
Strikes Hibernia's kindling lyre:
Hark how each "Heart of Oak," in thunder grave,
Roars to the billow's awful voice beneath:
O'er thee, fell Corsican, their flags they wave&mdash;
On thee, revenge, in lightnings red they breathe!

III.
Vocal no more be Gallia's vulture lay&mdash;
"Britons strike home" the harp illumin'd play&mdash;
But oh!  proud Erin, ne'er complain
Of warlike sons on Glory's altar slain:
Embalm'd in Heav'ns sweet dew they laurel'd lie&mdash;
Tho' smear'd with gore, and ghastly pale,
Far &mdash; far aloof affrighted Ravens sail&mdash;
The glutted Lion, sullen, growls,
And guards their manes with a blood-shot eye.

IV.
Dear lost companions of Bellona's art&mdash;
Dear as the light that visits these sad eyes&mdash;
Dear as the purple tide that swells my heart&mdash;
You fell amidst triumphant patriot cries!
One tear on friendship's urn I weep&mdash;
But oh!  they do not sleep;
In yon bright cloud I see them stand,
An Angel band!
Avengers of their native land&mdash;
I see them wave with bloody hand
(In glow divine)
The tissue of the Tyrant's line.

V.
Weave the warp, and weave the woof,
The winding sheet of ruffian race;
Give ample room, and verge enough,
ASSASSINATION'S form to trace:
Mark the year, and mark the night,
When Seine shall echo with affright,
The shrieks of Death from Louvre's tow'rs that ring
Shrill o'er the tomb of mild &mdash; of murder'd King!!!

VI.
He-Wolf of France, that, with relentless hate,
Wouldst gnaw the heart of who is good!
Wouldst lap the blood of who is great!
(Remember, Ruffians!  brave TOUISSANT'S sad fate)
Thou Scourge of Hell!  what honours round thee wait
Foul Treason in thy van, with Fear combin'd,
And Freedom's faded form, in clanking chains behind!
Sooner than bear the galling yoke,
Though fell'd by Fortune's fiercest stroke;
Sooner than hear thy fetter's clink,
Though tottering o'er Perdition' brink&mdash;
Sooner than wear thy blue-emblazon'd band,
Perish &mdash; Scaevola like! &mdash; each Briton's hand!

VII.
Mighty Victor!  Mighty Lord!
(On iron couch whose groveling glory lies)
No melting heart &mdash; not pitying eye afford
One drop to grace thy obsequies.
Vanquish'd warrior, thou art fled,
To rot among th' ignoble dead&mdash;
The baneful swarm,
In guillotine's corrupt, red channel born.

VIII.
Bright beams the Sun &mdash; high mount th' exulting tides&mdash;
Whilst proudly bounding on his azure realm,
The Royal George, with scarlet streamer, rides&mdash;
Mars on the prow &mdash; Minerva at the helm&mdash;
And Victory round main-top gallant winging,
And o'er the deck, with lofty beck,
The ROSE and SHAMROCK wreaths symbolic flinging.

IX.
Fill high the sparkling bowl&mdash;
The rich repast prepare
Around the Crown, grac'd with olives newly blown&mdash;
Spread the bay-begarnish'd feast.
Close by the regal chair
Let Peace, let Plenty cast
A smile benignant on each loyal guest.
Culverins of Julius, INVASION'S iron scurge,
O'er father Thames' bright silver surge,
In voice of Thunder roar,
Whilst three times three, with upward spring,
In glorious glee, "God save the King!"
All hands and hearts encore.
