Yet on the table lay the cold Ox-cheek,
Which had stood, cut and come again a week,
Whilst Royal Scullions &mdash; strangers to such fare,
Make chat of what things are, and what they were;
But first with Small-beer wash their morsel down,
Brought from board wages of a weekly crown,
For now, alas!  the Castle JACK'S unstrung,
Her Cook's set nought a running, save their tongue.

Four was the hour &mdash; and all sat spruce and easy,
No meat the larder held, to make them greasy,
When Drip and Stew to drive dull time the faster,
Hold, like true servants, con-fab, on their master.

STEW.
Oh!  never shall those luscious hours return,
In which these clay-cold grates were wont to burn;
When dripping from an hundred joints would ooze,
And thirsty cooks at will might porter booze;
When Stewards with a face so debonnair,
Would write each day a princely bill of fare;
From smoaking sirloin every viand see,
From much-lov'd callipash to callipee.
The boilers foam, the sauce-pan's shriller noise,
And all the reeking kitchen's melting joys,
Are fled!  one blank's before my eyes;
"Now half-starv'd spiders feed on half-starv'd flies."
The Cooks forget their trade, and, (cruel lot,)
If nought's to boil, themselves must go to pot!

DRIP.
Shame!  'tis not you that speaks, but your last cup,
Else may I flummery for blue-mange serve up!

STEW.
Hold Drip!  for that Faux pas you'd blameless stand,
For flumm'ry oft is nearest to your hand.

DRIP.
Fye, Stew!  upon your meddling tongue,
His Lordship's noble, and he's very young.

STEW.
Thanks to his father for his noble birth,
For youth, the lateness of his mother's mirth.

DRIP.
But, Stew, dear boy, allow, and cease to sneer,
My Lord feasts Royally upon the DEER!

STEW.
Aye, hecatombs still fall to please his gout,
'Twill last until the Park stock is run through:
'Twere great to serve both guest and servant satis,
Did not the ven'son come to table gratis.

DRIP.
What then?  Rash Cook!  your time and labour's lost
To place his Lordship's taste in lack of cost&mdash;
Learn then more rev'rence to bestow by far
Upon his fly-blue riband and his heav'nly star.

STEW.
Fine words!  contempt for tinsel and for silk,
I've suck'd in with my ancient mother's milk;
Will these console us when our drippings fail?
Or change our washy small-beer into ale?
Will these wipe out the sordid score we run?
Or satisfy the cravings of a Dun?

DRIP.
But say, did not my Lord, in time of grease
Of wages grant us bountiful increase?
Why then should we in idle spleen complain?
Not equal wages &mdash; but not equal pain&mdash;

STEW.
'Tis true my Lord did rigidly constitute
Grease, tallow, dripping &mdash; all the kitchen's fruit
By higher wages. &mdash; If we gain but less
His Lordship's liberal to himself not us.
Give me my former wages, grease and pains,
And snatch his Lordship from the chandler's stains,
Nor longer let him &mdash; proxy for his cook&mdash;
Rub tallow-robe and con the greasy book.

Thus they advanc'd and all that DRIP could do
Was instantly undone by wicked STEW.
His Lady's bounty next DRIP largely sings,
His plumag'd subject lent the Scullion wings:
&mdash;How a whole flock of geese and turkeys happen'd
To want for food, nor would with air be fatten'd;
Kill, was the word &mdash; away the Park-men carve,
'Twas mercy sure to kill them lest they'd starve,
And Bounty rose to give the neighbouring poor
Those scare-crows that disgrac'd the courtly door!
&mdash;How when a Duke with box went begging round,
And Kirwan Pity's chords to heart had wound,
My Lady parted with a whole &mdash; ten pound!

Of these vast deeds did STEW no journal keep,
Alas!  poor STEW but yawn'd then fell a sleep.
