....
And now to charm our gracious Q&mdash; and K&mdash;,
Ascending on a public stage,
The tuneful wonder of the age,
Hight Incledon, arose to sing.

Of war he chaunted &mdash; glorious war,
Of millions, millions, sent afar,
To aid of falling Monarchy the cause;
When, lo!  the lofty Great all smiled applause.

Of taxes now the great Musician sung&mdash;
The Court, the chorus join'd,
And fill'd the wond'ring wind;
And taxes, taxes, through the garden rung.
Monarchs first of taxes think:
Taxes are the Monarch's treasure:
"Sweet the pleasure,
Rich the treasure,"
Monarchs love a guinea's chink.

And now to Avarice he tun'd the strain,
That suck'd a Nation like a spunge&mdash;
And now to Dissipation's madding train,
Who in distress a People plunge.
Now to poor FRANCE his plaintive voice he tun'd&mdash;
When mark!  the melting AUDIENCE almost swoon'd!

The SONGSTER now a graver subject chose&mdash;
"Who is to pay performers that compose
This charming Fete FROGMORE?" were the words:
With much surprise,
And rolling eyes,
FOLKS heard the syllables, that stabb'd like swords;

Now voices came &mdash; "Mine Gote! &mdash; enuff, enuff."&mdash;
"How!  how!  what, what?  stuff, Incledon, stuff, stuff."
"We pay!  no, no!  mine Gote, we haf more wit."&mdash;
Go, go to Parliament &mdash; ask PITT, ask PITT."

With loaded subject, ah!  we see
A Jack-ass in the next degree;
When soon appear'd the emblematic brutes,
With chimney sweepers on their backs
That kick'd, and spurr'd, and lash'd their backs&mdash;
And well with such tame souls the treatment suits.
Off gallop'd, for royal amusement the Asses;
'Mid the Haycocks they scamper'd, and knock'd down the lasses&mdash;
Girls squall'd, the Court laugh'd, and the Jack-asses bray'd
At the sight of the legs by the tumble display'd.
A COUPLE leaped down from their state to the PRANCERS,
MUSICIANS and RACERS, TUNE-GRINDERS and DANCERS;
Shook all by the hand, who, in compliment clever,
Roar'd aloud, "Kings and Queens, Fun and Frogmore for ever!!!"
