Ha!  heard you not the clanging sounds of war,
Whilst love-lorn echo wafts the shouts around?
Or rides some chief in his triumphal car,
'Midst vict'ry's notes on trumpets' joyful sound?
Waves his right-hand the reeking blood-red steel,
That hand intrepid for his country's weal,
Drags he a thousand slaves, bound to his chariot wheel?

No, the proud pageant leaves no bloody trace,
The gleaming falchions bear no gory stains;
No mournful captives the procession grace,
'Midst clang of arms and minstrels' martial strains;
But peace o'er Sweden had her pinions spread,
And plenty springs where dying soldiers bled;
To-day a jewell'd crown bedecks a monarch's head.

See how he moves amidst the martial train,
The youth of promise, darling child of fame,
A high-bred steed obeys the skilful rein,
Whose mane is lightning, and his breath is flame.
Scarce fifteen summers had the stripling seen,
Brave as the Macedonic chief had been,
Who wept for other worlds to make a battle-scene.

Amidst his subjects' shouts he rides along
The youthful monarch of a warrior race:
Till Stockholm's sacred fane receives the throng,
And thousands crowd the consecrated place;
He leaves his horse, rejects his laurel-crown,
And on a lofty iv'ry seat sits down,
Like great Saturnian Jove on his Olympic throne.

Its walls are lofty, in the Gothic style,
Whilst grandeur sits enthroned with look sublime,
As if the guardian genius of the pile
Protects the temple from the hand of time:
The mausoleum of the mighty slain!
Look round&mdash;your eyes from out their orbits strain,
And say how man could raise such a gigantic fane.

Whilst Swedish lords and guards stand silent round,
Upsal's archbishop kneels before the shrine,
And on the earthly king, with awe profound,
Invokes a blessing from the King divine:
He poured the sacred oil upon his head,
Whose costly odour through the air was spread,
"Thus I anoint thee king," the holy prelate said.

Before the throne of Sweden's king he stands,
With eyes uplifted to the throne above;
The golden crown he holds in both his hands,
In solemn player his lips devoutly move:
"Pour out thy blessing on our king," he spoke,
But Charles the regal crown impatient took,
Self-crown'd he eyed the priest with basilistic look.

The deed is done&mdash;a thousand shouts prevail,
Hoarse as the roaring of the wind-tost waves,
Oblivion seems to cover with a veil,
The solemn temple and the silent graves;
"God save the king," the wond'ring nobles cry,
"God save the king," the martial guards reply,
"Who best can lead the Swedes to conquer or to die!"
