'Twas at that time, when solitary eve
Spreads her grey robe; as o'er the lily'd vale
Stray'd my lone steps, to a sequester'd shade
Immur'd with rustling boughs.  I marked a swain
Stroll pensively along; his hoary head
Was silver'd o'er by age; his bending hand
Lean'd on the propping staff; o'er his wan cheeks
(Shrunk by slow-stealing time) corroding care
Had cast her deep'ning furrows, whence the tear
Rill'd softly down; and from his lab'ring breast
The sighs of woe burst in repeated moans.

Compassion thrill'd my frame; I urg'd my way,
And hail'd the rev'rend mourner. &mdash; Now discourse
Ensu'd on either side; while all his pangs
I felt, as thus he told his piteous tale:

"My name is LYCIDAS; in yonder cot
(Hedg'd round with spreading shrubs) my wife and I
Late had our blest abode; &mdash; we had one son,
Pride of our age: &mdash; whose willing hands sustain'd
His feeble parents:  for he gave his thoughts
To crown our heads with joy, and all our cares
Smooth'd, soften'd, and allay'd.  The flush of health
Crimson'd his mellow cheek; and genial joy
Beam'd in his eye; with a superior mien
He trod amid the swains, while heart-felt peace
Adorn'd each feature. &mdash; Oh!  to scan the traits
Of former scenes &mdash; fled like a fleeting dream
Ne'er to return &mdash; what, and how vast the pang!

"A nymph the fairest of the rural throng,
Engag'd his heart, nor did he woo in vain
The blooming virgin; and th' appointed day
Had near arriv'd, to crown their tender loves.

"Who to themselves shall promise issuing joys?
None but the fool. &mdash; We thought of circling bliss
In future periods; &mdash; active fancy saw
Their little prattlers grasp our trembling knees,
Hang o'er our words with rapture, and repay
Our fondness with their smiles; but oh!  how vain,
How transient are our wishes!  This day gives
Joys unexpected; and returning dawn
Crowds on its mighty woes.

"One fatal eve,
My son, as wont, drove his accustom'd charge
To Tweed's pure current.  Limpid was the stream,
And all serene the sky; the setting sun
Stoop'd from the crimson'd cloud, and pour'd his beams
Full on the amber pool; the crystal stream
Reflecting back the rays, unto his eye
Disclos'd its pebbled bed.  The vocal choir
Melodious thrilling thro' the quiv'ring trees,
Chear'd all around; e'en nature's self conspir'd
To please, and tempt him in the cooling stream
To bathe his wearied limbs.  Lur'd by the scene,
He plung'd amid the wave, and sail'd awhile
Triumphant o'er its surface; till at once
Red rush'd the river down, and o'er the plains
Spread its desolation.  Thrice his nervous arm
Repell'd the swelling surge, and thrice the tide
Broke o'er him:  Snatch'd at once from life, from joy,
His much lov'd parents, and his eager hopes,
He sunk precipitate till rouz'd again
By death's dread struggles, (for the angry flood
Gush'd from his nostrils, and his heart beat thick
Within its pent-up chest) he gasp'd for breath
And made a faint essay; casting his eyes
O'er the extending deluge to the plain
In silent agony, he gaz'd for aid,
Alas, how vain!  for no relief was near.
Ye fathers, who have felt the throbs of woe
For a beloved son, O pity me,
While I relate, that from a distant mount
I saw afar his ruin.  Swift as the wind
I left the clift, and hast'ning on to save
My fondling from the stream, met greater woe.
His aged mother, and his beauteous bride,
Unknown to me, had climb'd a rising hill
To view the rolling deluge; when at once
A breaking wave unto their eyes disclos'd
A bulky object, whirling round and round
With the tempestuous billow; till at last
They dash'd it on the shore.  Both stooping down,
To eye it nearer, started with amaze
To view their darling's corpse; aghast they look'd
At other speechless, while convulsions shook
Their quiv'ring frames, and with a hollow shriek
They downward fell, and mix'd the frothy stream.

"Oh ye whose tender bosoms pity thrills,
Shed soften'd anguish; ye who feel the hand
Of ruthless want, bereav'd of all ye lov'd,
Give me the feeling tear; and guide your steps
To yonder lonely vale, where their lov'd dust
Adds to the mould'ring ruins.  Oft at eve
I speed my way, and stroll the peaceful graves
With tears of poignant pain.  For now to earn
A small subsistence, these week, feeble hands
Manure the rugged glebe; and my grey hairs
Sink to the dust with anguish, pain, and woe.
