Haste not, my friend!  but stay whoe'er thou art
With heedless step that tread'st my narrow bound,
Nor yet disdain, before thou dost depart,
To cast a serious, solemn look around;
View well these mansions of the sleeping dead,
The place to which thyself one day must come,
For thou and all mankind must make their bed,
Sooner or later, in the silent tomb.

View yonder monuments of marble there,
How rich in sculpture, and how rich in words!
The pompous stile elab'rately declares,
What are they there; and what the rank they hold;
And what the diff'rence now of shape and form?
None! &mdash; With the Lowest in the grave they're cold,
And lose distinction with their fellow-worm.

Heard'st thou that sound which struck just now my dome?
Know'st thou what 'tis? &mdash; a Peasant's fun'ral knell;
To-night they bring him to his last long home,
To see corruption, and with worms to dwell;
Last night his Grace (think of it and prepare!)
Yielded to Death, the Conqueror of Kings;
Dust like the Peasant now. &mdash; His equals are
Slaves, and himself &mdash; the least of mortal things.

Ah!  what avails the glare of regal state,
The shining pageantry of earthly courts,
Since greatest monarchs must submit to fate,
And fill the grave, the dernier resort
Of mortal man. &mdash; All men are born to die,
Whate'er the station they in life may fill,
The lowly Cottager and the Emp'ror high
Must quit this world when 'tis th' Almighty's will.

Here lies the Great!  does the false marble say;
Believe it not! &mdash; th' oppressor of the poor,
The widow's dread, lies humbled low in clay,
Nor shall he rise to grind the orphan more.
Behold the contrast, &mdash; a more worthy sight;
"An honest man, the noblest work of God,"
Rests yon in peace; nor needs the borrow'd light,
"That points the feather, and declares the rod."

What tho' no marble does preserve his name,
His name shall live when marble does decay;
His actions, found not in the list of fame,
Will find acceptance at the judgement day.
Now go thy way, consider what thou'st heard,
And what thou'st seen; know thou must stand the test!
Live well whilst here, be still for death prepar'd,
And may the Judge of All pronounce thee blest.
