Urania, Lutanist celestial, sweep
The sounding strings with vary'd Pauses, Art
Miltonic, Nature's lofty Voice, best tun'd
To sacred Theme, and sacred Theme to Song.
To spheral Choirs, O bear me, thou that erst
The Mantuan Seer, my great Example, rais'd
From humble Fields to draw empyreal Air,
Astonish'd, big with Raptures not his own.

No Wonder thus illumin'd, he foretold
Approaching Bliss, bright Progeny of Jove,
Effulgence of th' eternal Essence, full
Of Grace and Truth, celestial Visitant
On Earth, to lead us in the Paths of Peace
And Justice, and restore the Golden Age.
Behold, how bows the pregnant World beneath
Th' Almighty Load!  behold, all Nature smiles
Expressive of anticipated Joys.

Thus Virgil sung prophetic, what he sung
Unknowing, lo, that Age, nor after long
The Prophecy accomplish'd, when the LORD
Of Glory, condescending to conceal
His Brightness and instruct aspiring Man
In humble Virtues, first appear'd on Earth
In Flannel coarse enwrap'd, and Manger laid.

From that all-hallow'd Time when choral Host
Angelic, on the consecrated Hills
Of Bethlem sung to simple Shepherd Folk
Glad Tydings, unto you this Day is born
A SAVIOUR, CHRIST the LORD; to GOD on High
Be Glory, Peace on Earth, Good-will tow'rds Man;
From that, all-hallow'd Time, the Muses left
Parnassus, &mdash; Delphic and Dodonian Groves
Grew silent, &mdash; Pan himself forsook the Fields.

Thee, Pan, enamour'd Mantinea mourn'd,
Thee soft Cyllene; Pilot Thamus heard
The lamentable Dirge, him sailing cross
Th' Aegean, while becalm'd, a mighty Voice
Thrice hail'd, and thrice Euboea's concave Creeks
Rebellow'd Thamus; silent Horror struck
The boistrous Crew, 'till Thamus, sore aghast,
Assuming ill-feign'd Courage, spoke:  who calls
On Thamus?  Speed thee, Thamus, said the Sprite,
To still Mycenae, loudly there proclaim
This mournful Tale, The great God Pan is dead.
Straight the hoarse Shoar of antient Pelops rings
With dismal Groans, Arcadian Shepherds catch
The bounding Sounds, The great God Pan is dead.
By Pan forsaken, who shall now inspire
Enchanting Song?  who fill the sacred Pipe?
Pan first permitted not melodious Reeds
Want Use, Pan lov'd the Shepherd and his Flock.

Fond Shepherds, cease to mourn for fancy'd Pan;
Behold, th' Almighty LORD of Heav'n and Earth,
Your Shepherd comes, with Healing in his Wings
He comes; hark now the angelic Choir resound
His gracious ADVENT!  join them Pipe and Harp,
Lute, Trumpet loud, and Organ of deep Stop,
Each Sring and golden Wire with dulcet Voice
To celebrate his Praise in grateful Hymns,
And lift the Muses to their native Heav'n.
