Ascend, my muse, and seek a loftier strain,
Not all in shrubs and Tamarisks delight;
Sing now the dangers of the fairy train
That meet in mansion-house to pass the night
In song and dance, and jocund revelry&mdash;
But ah!  no earthly joys can ever certain be!

Sing now did there the gay assembly meet;
Assist me parent of the crooked lyre,
Like Hermes drest with wings at head and feet,
Assist me, and the poet's breast inspire;
For there were lyres and flutes and harp and fiddle,
And some sung toll-de-roll, and some squeaked tweedle diddle.

Some daemon sure, that luckless evening, happ'd
Fly out o'er N&mdash;b&mdash;ry to take the air:
He saw the dancing-room all mopp'd and swept,
Ods me!  quoth he, "What doings have we here!"
This sneaking town attempts to ape the court?
But, trust me, I'll for this time spoil their sport.

So said, so done; at six, that fatal night,
The west wind blows; who dusk and horror brings.
He veils his face, of darkness and affright,
While torrents spout form his shower-dripping wings;
What terrors now attend the hapless fair!
For all the town affords but one poor paultry chair.

But now, post-chaises all the nymphs requir'd,
Some from St. George, and from our good King's Arms;
But in the town all vehicles are hired&mdash;
Yet females to the ball-room run in swarms.
The school, that morn, all machines did seize,
One chaise could well contain seven small young Belles with ease.

But think not yet their happiness secure:
And lend an ear attentive while I sing
The perils of those maids, who dar'd endure
The evils rain on brussels-heads might bring;
(For, not the heaviest rain, with lightning join'd,
Can make one real woman change her mind.)

Now 'gain the dances, by our Gallic foes
Contriv'd; when lo!  a mighty crash is heard,
A craggy stone its frightful visage shows.
Huge, rugged, by a strenuous arm uprear'd;
Slow thro' the air flies the terrific mass,
And strews the room with crumbs of sand and shiver'd glass.

The pond'rous rock thund'ring on the floor,
Each nymph, affrighted, seeks a safe retreat,
Some crowd the not enough capacious door,
Some fain would thro' the windows seek the street.
What rout might engine worse have wrought perdie,
When one poor stone thus makes a troop of females flee.
