When August's sultry sun began to shine,
And warm upon the meads to spread its ray;
The apple redden'd, purple grew the vine,
The painted goldfinch sung the live-long day,
And luscious pears bent down the leafy spray;
'Twas now the pride, the manhood of the year,
And all the ground was ray'd in its most rich attire.

The sun was glowing in the midst of day,
Dead still the air, and all the sky was blue,
When from the sea arose the dread array
An heap of clouds of sable, sullen hue,
The which full fast unto the woodland drew,
Shading at once the sun's resplendent face,
And the black tempest swell'd, and gather'd up apace.

Beneath an holly, near a path-way side,
Which did unto St. Godwyn's convent lead,
An hapless pilgrim moaning did abide,
Poor in his look, ungentle in his weed,
Long had he borne the miseries of need.
Where from the hail-storm could the poor man fly?
Alas!  no house was near, nor any convent nigh.

Look in his gloomy face, his aspect scan,
How woe begirt &mdash; how wither'd, lank, and dead!
Haste to thy grave, thou poor, unhappy man!
Haste to thy coffin &mdash; that's thy sleeping bed!
Cold as the clay which will grow on thy head
Is charity and love among high elves,
Alas!  all Knights and Barons live &mdash; for pleasure and themselves.

The gather'd storm is ripe; the big drops fall;
The sun-burnt meadows smoke, and drink the rain;
The horrid sight the cattle do appall,
And the full flocks driving o'er the plain;
Dash'd from the clouds the waters float again;
Opens the sky, the livid lightnings flies,
And the hot stream in flames wide-spreading dies.

Hark!  now the thunder's distant rumbling sound
Moves slowly on &mdash; then burns, and rends the air,
Shakes the tall spire &mdash;and then expended, drown'd,
Still leaving horror on th' affrighted ear,
The winds blow high; trees nod; and desolation's near.
Again the lightning and the thunder pours,
And the full clouds all burst at once in hail-stone show'rs.

Spurring his palfry o'er the wat'ry plain,
The Abbot of St. Godwyn's convent came;
His small round beaver drenched was with rain,
His painted girdle stain'd with the same,
Backward his beads he did begin to name.
The storm impending, and he drew aside,
Nor did he near the pilgrim's shelter scorn to 'bide.

His cloke was of Lincoln's cloth so fine,
With a gold button fast'ned near his chin;
His white robes edged were with golden twine,
And his dress-shoe a lord's might well have been;
&mdash;Full well it shew'd he thought it was so sin.
The trammels of his palfrey pleas'd his sight,
Which richly caparison'd, gave him great delight.

An alms, Sir Priest!  the dropping Pilgrim said,
Oh!  let me wait within your convent door,
Till the sun shineth high above our head,
And the loud tempest of the air is o'er;
Helpless and old am I, alas!  and poor,
No house, no friend, no money now in store,
This silver cross is all &mdash; which humbly I adore.

Varlet!  reply'd the Abbot, cease your din;
This is no season alms and pray'rs to give;
My porter never lets a beggar in;
None enters there who don't in honour live&mdash;
And now the sun with the black clouds did strive,
And shedding on the ground it's glaring ray,
The Abbot spurr'd his steed, and furious rode away.

Once more the sky was black, the thunder roll'd,
Fast running o'er the plain a Priest was seen;
Not gayly deck'd, nor button'd up in gold;
His priestly garb was grey, and eke 'twas clean;
A Limitoure he was of order seen;
And from the path-way side then turned he,
Where the poor beggar lay beneath the holly tree.

An alms, Sir Priest!  the drooping Pilgrim said,
For sweet St. Mary and your order sake.
The pious man then loosen'd his purse thread,
And did thereout a groat of silver take;
Which did for joy the unhappy Pilgrim shake.
"Here take this silver, it may ease thy care;
We are God's stewards all, nought of our own we bear.

"But ah!  unhappy Pilgrim, learn of me,
Scarce any give rentrolle to their Lord,
Here, take my under-stole &mdash; thour't bare I see;
'Tis thine &mdash; the Saints will give me my reward,"
He eas'd the Pilgrim's wants &mdash; 'twas all he could afford.
"Virgin and holy Saint, who sit'st above,
O give the good man pow'r, or fill the rich with love."
