On Redburn's bank two pining matrons sat,
Their tears fast dripping in the waters clear,
Each much lamenting for her absent mate,
Who at St. Alban's shook the warlike spear.
The nut-brown Eleanor to Juga fair
Did faintly speak, with languishment of eyn,
Like drops of pearly dew descending from the sky.

ELEANOR.
O gentle Juga!  hear my sad complaint,
To fight for York my love is drest in steel;
Oh!  may no bloody stain the White Rose paint,
May good old Cuthbert watch Sir Robert well:
Much more than death I in my fancy feel;
See, see!  upon the ground he bleeding lies;
Infuse some healing juice of life, or else my dear  love dies.

JUGA.
Sisters in sorrow, on this daisy ground,
Where melancholy reigns, we will lament:
Where ev'ning rains, and morning dews abound,
Like blighted myrtles to this ground we're bent,
Or like forsaken halls of merriment,
Whose horrid ruins are an awful sight,
Where the hoarse Raven croaks, and Owls disturb the night.

ELEANOR.
No more the sprightly fife shall wake the morn,
The minstrel dance, good cheer, and social play;
No more the huntsman's shout, nor ecchoing horn,
Shall from the cover rouse the fox away.
Pensive I'll rove the woods the live-long day:
All night among the church-yard graves I'll go,
And to the flitting sprights will tell my tale of woe.

JUGA.
When the black clouds hang round the silver gleam
Of slow-descending moon, in beauty bright,
The tripping fairies weave the golden dream
Of Happiness &mdash; which endeth with the night.
Then (but the Saints forbid!)  if to a sprite
Sir Richard's form is chang'd, &mdash; instant I'll fly,
And clasp his clay-cold heart, and daily will I die.

ELEANOR.
Ah woe-betiding words!  what words can shew!
"Thou sacred stream, on thy fair banks may bleed
Heroes, whose blood will with thy waters flow,
And Redburne's stream be Redburne stream indeed;"
Haste, gentle Juga, trip it o'er the mead,
To know, or whether we must 'wail again,
Or with  our fallen knights be mingled on the plain.

So saying, like two light'ning-blasted trees,
Or like two clouds, replete with loaded rain,
They both were wafted by a fatal breeze
To where St. Alban's holy shrines remain;
There did they find that both their knights were slain.
Distracted, wand'ring to swol'n Redburn's side,
Screaming they plunged in, sunk in the wave, and died.
