Were not thy mountains' deep foundations laid,
Columbia, when in heaven th' Eternal Word
Spake forth creation?  And when light obey'd,
O'er the far west was not its full flood pour'd?
And when the rushing waters sought their bed,
Rose not thy queenly land majestic and outspread?

Why art thou new and young?  Wert thou not twinn'd
With her thine Eastern sister in thy birth?
It is that on her shore earth's sovereign sinn'd!
And death's stern mandate came o'er nature's mirth,
As doth untimely frost on soft-eyed flowers;
And laid decay and age upon her Eden bowers.

While thou, like healthy plant by mountain stream,
Flourish'd in strength and greenness, and the years
Moved o'er thee lightly, as a sunny dream;&mdash;
The deadly thorn is nourish'd by man's tears;&mdash;
In human sins and sighs the curse is felt!
'Twas then &mdash; while peace amid thy solitudes still dwelt.

And thus upon thy brow the crown of youth,
Its flowery crown, was radiant and undimm'd;
When the leagued exiles, vow'd to holy truth,
The steadfast came! &mdash; and loud their voices hymn'd
The great Jehovah, and He was their God!
They saw Him power and love, where'er their footsteps trod.

Stranger, explore our deep and pathless woods,
Where sunbeams for long centuries have not slept;
Climb cloud-crown'd hills, and trace the sounding floods,
Whose waters since creation's birth have swept,
Unmark'd by human eye &mdash; and own the view,
How grand and awful to behold a world so new!

'Twill rouse thy soul from lethargy, and break
The chains that custom round her victims binds,
And high and holy energies will wake,
And thou wilt feel, how strong are steadfast minds;
And catch some portion of that quenchless flame,
That fired the pilgrim band, when hitherward they came.

And bore they arms, or sumless riches here,
To found a nation mighty as the land?
The perfect faith that casts off mortal fear&mdash;
The free thought, spurning tyranny's command&mdash;
Wealth, weapons of the soul!  nought else was theirs;
And thus a world was won by zeal and fervent prayers!

Rome's eagle and the Union's! &mdash; One his flight
Held o'er war's storm where carnage might not cease;
The other, 'mid calm skies of cloudless light,
Waves his broad wings, and leads the march of peace!
War and ambition o'er the old world reign&mdash;
Freedom and peace, Columbia, bless thy green domain!
