'Tis morning; we have seen a glorious sight,
When the pale, twinkling stars began to die,
And the fair sun came up in youthful might,
To spread his banner in a cloudless sky;
Joy was around him; murmuring winds came by,
Breathing of life and freshness; every sound
Of love and joy rose on them wild and high;
E'en sorrow, with such scenes of gladness round,
Felt her cold, burden'd heart stir with a lighter bound.

'Tis morn; but where's the morning's beauty now?
Clouds of portentous shade have quench'd the sun,
And hang upon the pillar'd mountain's brow,
Where the deep howling tempest is begun;
The arm of winter's power once more has won
Its empire over earth; cold, bleak winds roar
Through naked forests; streams are dashing on
In fearful strength, and wailing sounds deplore
The wreck of those bright things, that charm'd so much before.

'Tis noon; no cloud is on the face of heaven;
Yet in his midday height the sun does glow
With setting paleness, and no life is given
To earth or air; no fragrant blossoms throw
Their sweetness o'er the fields; no breezes blow;
And there is not a breath of sound to cheer
The wanderer's way, save the cold river's flow,
Or falling of a leaf, now pale and sere,
The sad memorial of a fading, dying year.

'Tis mournful, but withal I love it more
Than every bright or gloomy hour beside;
For one so calm, so pensive, can restore
Lost quietude; though tears the while may glide
Down the worn cheek in spite of youthful pride,
So softly and so peacefully they fall;
Howe'er the aching heart may wish to hide
What men name weakness, it would not recall
The tears, that wash away the "wormwood and the gall."

Night falls on earth; the sky has not a star
Of all its host; the moon looks dimly through
Mists of deep, boding darkness, borne from far
By the chill north wind; where soft breezes blew,
And the wild birds of summer lightly flew,
That wind now wakes alone its stormy howl,
Scattering its drops of cold and blasting dew,
And keeping harmony with the fierce growl
Of hungry wolf, and hooting of ill-omen'd owl.

How sad the change!  decay and death have made
Dark traces upon earth &mdash; the pride, the boast
Of mortal beauty is all lowly laid
In its cold grave; things, that delighted most,
Have lost their brightness or themselves are lost;
And those, perchance, we trusted in, are gone,
Repaying all the strife and pain they cost,
With hopes and expectations overthrown,
And leaving woes, which, but for them, we ne'er had known.

Yet weep ye not; for things so vain, so frail,
It were unwise to mourn; but still they speak
A solemn language, and it may avail
Thy erring spirit much to go and seek
Its meaning; they will tell how poor, how weak,
How frail thou art; that soon the mighty storm
Will gather o'er thee bitter, cold and bleak,
Will shower ruin on thy lovely form,
And make thee what no genial suns may wake or warm.

Oh, canst thou stand upon the opening grave,
And feel the trembling earth give way, and feel
That thou art sinking, with no arm to save,
And not a shuddering horror o'er thee steal?
Oh, do those lonely church yard flowers conceal
Nothing, at thought of which thou'rt wont to quake?
If unto this thy heart can set its seal,
I call thee blest; when the last morn shall break,
To everlasting joy and bliss thou shalt awake.

Thou shalt awake; if heaven had not declared
That man is more than mortal, earth might tell
The glorious truth; I saw when ruin spared
Nought, that was beautiful; the flowers fell,
The leaves all wither'd; yes, I heard the knell
Of dying nature, and in sadness mourn'd
Over her grave; but soon she broke the spell
That bound her, soon the fires, that slumber'd, burn'd
Anew, and all her joy and loveliness return'd.

Thus shalt thou rise, and life shall be renew'd
With more than former power in thy frame;
The burial earth shall not on thee be strew'd
Again, that life shall be a deathless flame,
Forever, save in growing strength, the same.
O, strive then, that thy glorious lot may be,
Within the book of life to find thy name;
For earth and heaven declare aloud to thee,
Thy fate is link'd to dark and dread eternity.
