To arms, to arms, ye sons of might,
And hail, with sounds of war, the new-born year.
Britannia, from her rocky height,
Points to your blood-drenched coast, and drops her spear.

But waves a flaming brand,
With which the fiends have arm'd her red right hand,
And menaces to ravage all your land.
Th' unnatural hated, which by turns
Wakes and sleeps, with fury burns.
See!  in her left that barb'rous scroll
Which vengeance brings her from th' infernal cell,
With hopes of spoil, where she despairs to quell.
New cause of just disgrace her madness sounds,
For FRANCE protects the freedom ENGLAND wounds,
And bids fair commerce spread the sail,
Beneath her snow-white banner to the gale.

Blush, Britain!  blush, and boast no more
Of what thou wast in days of yore,
When Freedom lov'd thy sea-girt shore;
When great in war, of skill possest,
She fir'd each patriot's glowing breast,
With ardour for the public weal.
Now from thy isle indignant she retires;&mdash;
Here other Britons at her altars kneel;
She bids us emulate our sires,
And scorn thy desolating steel,
By tomohawks and persecuting fires&mdash;
Her loss at least proud Britons feel;
That want of Freedom damps each public aim;
Whoe'er the lords they serve, th' oppression is the same.
Power ministerial rarely knows,
Rarely heeds the subjects woes;
By force, or bribes, from every land,
By blood hound Butler's knife, at Johnstone's hand,
It claims whate'er ambitions dares demand.
The western merchant, plunder'd swain,
May pour his weak complaints in vain;
IERNE'S sorrow's are her own,
And SCOTLAND feels not, tho' South Britain groan.
O happier far, that equal state,
Which blends the ruler's with the subject's fate,
And links the Fasces to the plough!
Such as in elder time, in Greece and Rome,
Bade freeborn man his native rights resume,
And laid each scepter'd despot low&mdash;
The stroke which wounds the lowliest clown, when free,
Is treason to the PEOPLE'S MAJESTY,
For them SOCIETY was form'd, by their decree.&mdash;
One common flame, one active soul
Pervades, and animates the whole;
One heart, one hand directs the blow,
And hurls the vollied vengeance on the savage foe.
