From loftier Subjects the Heroick Muse,
Groveling descends, to sing of low Intrigues,
With Oyster-Damsels, and their nightly Haunts:
The Theme not common, tho' its Objects so!
When the brown Dusk of Ev'ning, o'er the Sky
Brings Darkness, grateful to the lurking Thief,
Or Whore street-walking, or salacious Squab
Of pamper'd Dutchess, when in quest of Spark,
Broad-shoulder'd, o'er the unfrequented Mead,
She solitary and expecting strays.
Then let me often, thro' the darksome lane
Oft-winding wander, whilst far off I hear
The well-known, shrill, Winter-denoting Cry
Of Oysters fresh; when warbled thro' the Throat
Of modest Rowland (whether Moll, or Sall,)
Or graceful Tant.  Names not unknown to Fame
Tho', as I ween, unsung!  Then I pursue,
With watchful Eyes, and silent Pace, the Voice
Now nearer drawing; lest (tremendous Sight)
A Proctor comes insidious; and with Looks
And Words dire-menacing should interrupt
Or fright me from my yet-untasted Joys,
As on the Banks, where Egypt's swarthy Sons,
From secret-springing Nile, with cooling Draughts
Asswage their Thirst, and quench their fiery Blood,
The faithful Dog, (domestick Animal!)
With Tongue out-lolling, and with foaming Mouth
The River seeks; but fears, (if Fame says true)
To stop t' enjoy his Draught, but running drinks;
Cautious lest from beneath the rolling Wave,
A fraudful Crocodile, amphibious Beast,
Uprising, should, with horrid Gripe, detain,
And Teeth infix'd, devour th' unwary Prey.
Happy the Man who may with Safety roam
The Street uninterrupted, and enjoy,
In pleasing Interview, the Talk polite
Of British Damsels, who in tuneful Sounds,
Their Wainfleet-Oysters nightly chant aloud:
Him nor the watchful Magistrate affrays,
Nor Proctor still more terrible!  He roams
Thro' Lanes and Alleys unappall'd, in which
The Mother-Bawds their secret Revels keep;
There Rosa-Solis or Geneva drinks
Of Taste delicious!  or, if Fancy leads,
Calls in Crowdero, whose harsh-sounding Strains
Inspire the Dance, or kindle am'rous Fires.
Or else perhaps the Night in merry Chat
Passes, whilst on all sides from Lass to Lass,
The smutty Joak and Laugh's alternate ply'd.
Not fares it so with me:  with cautious Fear,
Oblig'd to snatch a Kiss in Corner vile;
Or else if Fortune, and dark friendly Night,
Favours a safer Interview, unseen
To some blind, unfrequented House she leads
In Nook obscure, where some ill-scented Hole,
O'ergrown with Filth, the Mother-Hostess shews
With Look important, and with Whispers low,
Arreads to Caution, and to Silence deep.
Then in brown Mug, or dirty leathern Jack,
(Cut from the worn-out Boot of Traveller,)
Her muddy and ill-tasted Liquor brings.
Straightway my Lips turn from the nauseous Draught
Abhorrent, and the just-touch'd Cup refuse.
Not so the Damsel, she with eager Looks
Ingulfs the Brothel-Nectar &mdash; and perswades
To mend my Draught.  Mean time with hideous Noise,
And Thumps ill-boding, at the Ante-Door,
A Proctor's heard; amaz'd I stare, and ask,
With trembling Voice, that at the most affords
But Utterance, what Shelter's to be found.
Mean time with louder and still louder Voice,
And Blows repeated, he Admittance claims.
A ghast, confounded, with weak knocking Knees
(That scarce support their Weight) the vile Recess
I seek of Bog-house, and th' affrighted Nymph,
In doleful Plight forsake.
Beware, ye Youths, whene'er ye rove, beware:
Be circumspect, for oft with prying Eyes
A lurking Villain, by the Vulgar call'd
A Pimp, observes your Haunts, and straight declares
The Place of Assignation, and the Time:
Or else with Congee cringing, and with Look
Dissembling Friendship, and false fawning Speech
Offers to bring the fairest of her Sex,
As yet of Man unknowing, pure and sound,
To mix in warm Embrace, and bless your Arms:
But then beware You hearken to the Tale,
Which, Syren like, invites to cruel Pain,
And Smart corrosive; for full oft beneath
The glossy, tempting Surface of a Skin
Angelick, Poisons lurk and hidden Fate.
Sometimes, alas!  am I condemn'd to sit
Whole tedious Nights, in solitary Room,
Poring o'er dull old Books, and still to add
To my Misfortune, often meet with Mirth,
In gay Description's Dress:  the chearful Fire
High-blazing, circling Glass, and full-fill'd Bowl
Nectareous, and the fragrant-scented Whiff,
Curling in cloudy Circles to the Roof.
E'en so of Liberty a Pris'ner dreams,
And inexhausted Wealth; rich Domes arise
Aerial, Hangings in gay Purple glow
Magnificent, while Mirth and Joy abound.
Awak'd, the shadowy, dear Idea's fled.
Phantom illusive!  and coercive Chains,
And Walls impregnable forbid Egress.
Pale Melancholy frowns in gloomy State
Sad Thoughts inspiring; and the glimmering Light
Serves only to discover Sights of Woe.
