Hear Truth invite!  hear Science plead!
Bold traveller, their voice attend,
Eager to give thee honour's mead,
And hail thee as their public friend!
Avent'rous BRUCE, allow their claim;
And, since thy toils at genuine glory aim,
Let thy accomplish'd hand consign those toils to fame!

What tho', to strike the author mute,
Uplifting a sarcastic hand,
(The page of sceptical dispute)
Detraction on the watch may stand,
With Ignorance leagu'd! &mdash; and hideous pair!
Who stop warm Genius with petrific stare,
In all his bright pursuits, to every generous care!

'Twas brave disdain of these base foes
That form'd the demi-gods of old:
By this to modern glory rose
The names that learning has inroll'd.
These, then, who prey on worth sublime,
These foes contemn, the press of every clime!
Tho' worse thou could'st not meet in Egypt's quick'ning slime!

Eager to crush their reptile spite,
With thee in firm alliance stand
Spirits, who feast on mental light,
Virtue and Science, hand in hand.
"Whate'er thy wide research might find
Impart," they cry, "to benefit mankind,
With intellectual food, with opulence of mind."

Since rival arts thy life have grac'd,
Give not thy aid to one alone!
Tho' BURNEY, with discerning taste,
Implor'd that aid in friendship's tone:
BURNEY, whose leaves thy talent tell;
BURNEY, historian of the tuneful shell;
Of excellence the friend, and fashion'd to excel!

See all the arts, a social tribe,
With friendly zeal around thee wait,
Keen from thy spirit to imbibe
New lights, to dignify their state.
From thee, with rare experience fraught,
They ask what Afric's unknown genius taught,
Lost knowledge to revive, or aid inventive thought.

Dost thou not see in solemn dreams,
Oft as thy letter'd vigils cease,
The fire of life-supporting streams,
Parent of commerce, wealth, and peace,
Imperial Nile before thee rise!
My mental eye his awful form espies,
While the indignant power, in honest anger cries;

"O BRUCE!  by my indulgence led,
To scenes no ancients might explore,
To those coy fountains latent head,
Whence all my genial gifts I pour;
Since I, as kind as thou wast bold,
Shew'd thee my wonders, Why dost thou with-hold
What Science bids thy hand to all her sons unfold!

"Remember, as my fruitful tide
Throws verdant life on lands below;
So round the world, 'tis Britain's pride,
New streams of mental light to throw!
And happiest they, tho' envy lour,
Who most encrease thy country's richest power,
Her radiance of renown from intellectual dower!"
