While some affect the serious, some the gay,
Some sing of love, and some of cruel war,
Their aims as various as the roads they take
In journeying through life &mdash; The task be mine
To paint the horrors of that dismal seat,
Where oft appear those poor unfortunates
Who venture, ere the nuptial knot is tied,
Nature's first law, and greatest, to obey&mdash;
Repenting-stool! &mdash; dread word!  at thought of thee
The rustic maiden stops her chearful song;
And, conscious of her frailty, pensive broods
O'er all the horrors of the frightful scene.

Well she remembers, that, in former days,
Ere yet her heart had listen'd to the tale
Of artful love, she, like her neighbours, has,
With wanton cruelty, join'd the rattling crowd,
To laugh at an unhappy frail one's folly,
And active Fancy faithfully portray's
The jibes and sneers which she in turn must meet
If e'er her story reach the Session's ears.

Strange things, the gossips say, do happen there;&mdash;
As how the liquorish Elders oft will ask
The history of the courtship &mdash; how begun&mdash;
How carried on &mdash; and where the guilt was first
Contracted; &mdash; how oft it was renew'd:
And, ever and anon, with solemn face
A candid answer urge &mdash; nought but the truth,
And all the truth, without reserve, require.
Ah!  how shall she to them those truths explain
Which from herself she wishes to conceal!
Ah!  how shall she recount the wandering thoughts
Which in her youthful bosom first arose!
Or half the nameless, little, artful tales
Which won her to consent!  Can she,
O'ercome with awe, oppress'd with grief, relate
The sportive dalliance of the fatal hour
In which she was undone?  Distracting thought!
Nor that the worst.  It wounds her to the soul,
E'en when that trial is o'er, to stand expos'd,
While bursts of sorrow gush from either eye&mdash;
The pity of her friends &mdash; the jest of those
Whom, in a happier hour, she once contemn'd&mdash;
To meet the parish &mdash; all the world to her&mdash;
Conven'd to witness her complete disgrace.

Ah!  whether shall she turn, or whether fly!
Where her dishonour hide!  Her tortur'd mind
A thousand schemes proposes, and rejects.
Her thoughts affright her &mdash; but they haunt her still;
Till grown familiar, she at last resolves&mdash;
I'll add no more &mdash; it makes one's blood run chill.

O ye whom watchful Providence has plac'd
To guard the flock, and, with a careful eye,
Observe their wanderings, and conduct their steps,
Deem not this theme unworthy your regard:
Deem not the Master Shepherd won't respect
Your kindness to the meanest in the fold:
O punish gently whom they chance to stray;
With kind compassion win the stragglers back,
And do not hunt them with the noisy dog
To them as frightful as the hungry wolf
Who lies in wait, and marks them for his prey.
