The Curfeu tolls the knell of parting day;
The bustling Clerks are now from labour free;
Th' Extractors homeward plod their weary way;
The Closet's left to darkness, and to me.

Now fade the glimmering writ-bags on the sight,
And all the rooms a solemn stillness hold,
Save where the moth does wheel his lazy flight,
And clicking wood-worms gnaw the tables old.

Save that from yonder distant vennel head,
Some noisy dame does to the Guard complain
Of drunken Bucks, who, staggering from a feed
Have smash'd her glasses, and her cat have slain!

Beneath these nasty bags, that bench's shade,
Where lies the dust in many a dirty heap,
Each in his narrow cell most closely laid,
Th' extracted processes for ever sleep.

The roaring call of Macers in the morn,
The Lawyers thundering, and the L&mdash; themselves,
And Messengers, those servants of the Horn,
No more shall rouse them from their dusty shelves.

Perhaps to this neglected spot is laid
Some suit once pregnant with judicial fire;
Writs, which the minds of learned Lords have sway'd,
And stir'd the Advocates to burning ire.

For Knowledge in their lines, her ample page
Rich with the spoils of law, would full unroll,
Brought forth by all the genius of the age,
Inspir'd by great Justinian's awful soul.

Yet ev'n these writs from insult to protect,
Some frail memorial's still erected nigh,
A label-card, with names of parties deck'd,
To point them out as any passes by.

For which, of dumb forgetfulness the sport,
Its quibbling, quirky being e'er resign'd,
Lest the [illegible]
Without some mark its lurking-hole to find?

The boast of eloquence, of wit the power,
And all the works of Genius itself,
Await alike th' inevitable hour:
The toils of Counsel lead but to the shelf!

THE EPITAPH.
Here rests his head upon this beechan board&mdash;
A Suit to Writers, and to Clerks well known;
The litigants &mdash; a Viscount and a Lord;
And Lawyers mark'd it out as all their own.

Large was their bounty, their contention strong,
With open purse, and many a clinking fee:
But now 'tis o'er!  the Guineas all are gone!
And nothing left but &mdash; musty writ &mdash; Ah me!
