Thus far the Oak &mdash; Without Dismay
The unrepenting Dunghill lay;
His Flatterers, and his native Pride,
The failing Argument supply'd:
The Mushroom ne'er his Levee fail'd,
The candid Toadstool weekly rail'd;
Pumpkins turn'd furious Upstart-Haters,
And Virtuous Nettles scribb'd Satyrs;
All praise their Patron's want of Shame,
And bless the Dunghill's whence they came.
They said whate'er cou'd give delight,
Flatt'ries proverbially trite:
"Dear Sir, to Day you maul'd the Oak,
Sure, never Dunghill better spoke."
&mdash;"Oh Gentlemen!  but sure you flatter,
You know 'tis not my way to spatter:
Tho' now an then I throw some Mud,
In hope to do a little good;
I'd have the innocent By-stander,
Take it for Argument and Candour."
"No doubt on't Sir."&mdash;

They thus went on,
And Things were said, and Dirt was thrown.
At length by unobserv'd Degrees,
The Heap receiv'd such vast Increase,
The Dunghill to a Nusance rose,
And stunk in every honest Nose;
The just Redress which Laws ordain,
The Tenants long had sought in vain;
Till the good Landlord interpos'd,
And thus the vain Contention clos'd.

"Base Thing!  is this the just Return,
For Punishment so long forborn?
And would'st thou with the Oak compare,
With my lov'd Tree my Favours share!
The Tree whom I delight to grace,
Glory of me and all my Race!
Beneath whose broad extended Shade,
My Happy Sire securely play'd;
In Halcyon Hours his chosen Seat,
In every Storm his sure Retreat:
But what art thou? &mdash; A Dunghill still,
At best a Necessary Ill.
At length thy latest Hour is come,
Prepare to know and meet thy doom:
Henceforth shall Dirt and Slander cease,
I yield thee to the Publick Peace;
The Laws thy Licence shall restrain,
And rid the Village of its Pain;
To dig thee up my Friends prepare,
And bear thee hence, &mdash; no matter where.
Thy Ruin may some Good produce,
Thy Rankness turn to real Use;
And Thou reform'd by Fortune's Stroaks,
May'st aid the Growth of future Oaks."

My Landlord spoke.  'Twas said and done;
The Justice was oppos'd by none:
The Dunghill by itself belov'd,
Was now without a Sigh remov'd;
The Weeds indeed had broke its Fall,
Had they but had the Wherewithall:
The Nettles instant dy'd away;
The Patriot Pumpkins where are they?

"Thus, quoth my Landlord, shall it fare,
With all that with my Oak compare.
So future Dunghills may be seen,
Indulging each his little Spleen,
As busy, fretful, and as rotten,
Like this remov'd, and so forgotten:
Whilst still the Oak with Garlands crown'd,
Firm-rooted, shall maintain its Ground."

The Meads applaud the just Decree,
The Hedges heard, and told it me.
