While the deep offences of unnumber'd dyes,
To Heaven's high Throne with clamorous siege ascend,
To urge the lingering vengeance from the skies,
While discord shakes the world; our heavenly FRIEND,
With intercession mild, suspends the blow,
And breathes his peaceful prayer, thro' kindred saints below.

Yet Justice stern displays her ponderous sword,
Reluctant waiting the permissive nod,
And Reason scarcely listens to the word,
Which speaks the mercy of a Saviour God,
So vast the crimes, so forcibly they plead,
To them a guilty land to punishment decreed.

Shall then th' uplifted thunder crush to dust
Earth's rebel sons, and burst each vaulted dome?
Shall savage beasts prefer their equal boast,
And claim the attic structures for their home?
While fields untill'd, alone by these are trod,
And roads, and cities fam'd, rank with the grassy sod?

'Tis just!  no plea arrests the penal stroke!
Rebellious worms should by rebellion die!
Ah!  what avails it mercy to invoke,
Whom violence has banish'd from the sky!
When slighted Love her angel-form declines,
And rigorous justice in tremendous glory shine!

Shall every precept by th' Eternal giv'n,
Be violated, yet th' offender live?
Shall sinners slight the offer'd grace of Heav'n,
Pervert each blessing bounteous love can give,
With journey retrograde their Maker dare,
Yet gain the kingdom by a moment's feeble pray'r?

While crowded Theatres affront the skies,
And with contagious vice infect the throng;
While art and vanity united rise,
To waste the hours in luxury and song;
While sumptuous fare, and gorgeous robes conspire
To stupefy the soul, and feed its guilty fire.

And holy Temples for devotion rear'd,
Their scanty ranks of drowsy souls display;
By whom too oft perdition less is fear'd
Than that reproach which marks the narrow way.
Unjust pretenders to that sacred creed,
Which fill'd the skies with saints, who dar'd on earth to bleed.

Ah Britain!  once the highly favour'd ground,
On which th' ALMIGHTY shower'd his choicest shore,
When peace and plenty every labour crown'd,
And concord bound thee to yon western shore;
How happy then!  Now dire intestine jars,
And foes with menace fierce, portend destructive wars.

Aloof we hear the battles' loud alarm;
The hideous cannon with continued roar,
Proclaims approaching death and wide spread harm;
Confusion echoes from the martial shore;
The sounding trumpet, and the clashing spear,
Mingled with soldiers' shouts, and shrieks of dying fear.

And are there not amongst the righteous found
With us, even us, the sinful and impure?
Alas!  our glory's levell'd with the ground!
Our crown is fallen and our light obscure!
Our lukewarm souls their festering sores conceal,
Slightly we feel the smart, slightly the sickness heal.

Where are the works of piety and love,
Which once distinctly mark'd the chosen race?
Who now, obedient to his Lord above,
The pris'ner visits, and with kind embrace
Receives the needy stranger, and extends
His free good-will alike, for enemies and friends?

Who clothes the naked with his needless veil?
Who stints his board, the hungry faint to chear?
Who claims the pining orphan for his guest?
And god-like, wipes the widow's tear?
How small a difference in the saints is found,
From those who spend their days in wanton pleasure's round!

What mean these varied hues of gay attire,
Which clothe the gentle votaries of the cross?
What mean the elegancies which conspire,
To deck our tables, and our domes emboss?
O, curst expedients to sustain our pride,
Whose thousands pine around, for whom the Saviour died.

How thinly rang'd along the house of prayer,
These dainty followers of a suffering Lord!
What cold attention when assembled there!
Their ears scarce open'd to the living word!
Hardly resolv'd their languid voice to raise,
In supplicating cries, or hymns of sweetest praise.

And O!  what dying fires inform the heart,
While thus imperfect all their works remain?
While earth from heaven steals back so large a part,
Are these redeem'd from conversation vain?
What speaks the spot ere-while to prayer assign'd?
The sacred page unsearch'd, the passions unconfin'd?

Where breathes the meekness of the heaven-born child,
The lowly tenderness and humble love,
The faith all ardent, and the spirit mild,
With active zeal attemper'd from above,
And charity, which flames intense and wide,
With unremitted toil, to bless on every side?

Who warns the sinner of approaching woe?
Who points the mourner to a Saviour's cross?
Who bids the thoughtless heed, the untaught know?
And calls the fallen to retrieve their loss?
Who, with strong faith, the Mercy-seat assails?
Where is the faith which still in life and death prevails?

Who now the heavenly SPIRIT entertains,
The sacred Shechinah, a present God?
Say, where the blessed stranger now remains?
Or griev'd, &mdash; forsakes he his unlov'd abode?
Bosoms which beat for earth, and scarce perceive
The Spirit's transient visit, or his final leave!

O!  Thou rejected by earth's guilty race!
Too oft forgot by those who know thy Name!
Spirit of  peace, and purity, and grace,
Who erst thy people crown'd with holy flame!
Return, with blessing, once again return,
And seal our hearts thy shrine, for heav'n alone to burn.

Come, heal our spirits sickness; bid us rise
To dwell with GOD, where all our hopes ascend!
Once more renew us, to salvation wise!
Once more return, our blest abiding Friend!
Fire our cold hearts to seize the prize before,
No more to grieve thy love, &mdash; to stray from thee no more.

Deign, holy FATHER!  our return to bless;
To thee, with deep abasement we draw near,
To claim thy pardon, while our souls confess,
Low prostrate at thy feet with contrite fear,
We have not, Lord, improv'd thy bounteous grace,
Yet from thy people's sin, O!  turn away thy face!

And thee, REDEEMER!  from whose tender care,
Like simple sheep we all have widely stray'd,
Yet now returning, hear thy suppliants' prayer.
Henceforth we crowd thy fold, and claim thy aid!
Our Shepherd thou!  O!  save thro' life's short day,
And save, when nature fades, and earth and heaven decay.

ALMIGHTY THREE!  before whose awful Throne,
We bow submissive to thy sovereign will;
Righteous are all thy ways, thy thoughts unknown,
Thy hand can raise us, or thy word can kill:
Easy with Thee to crush a sinking land,
Or bid destruction cease, and peace victorious stand.

But O!  whate'er our future lives await,
Or war, or famine, or some milder doom,
O!  save thy children, thro' their varied fate,
Or spread thy banner, and convey them home;
'Midst nature's fatal wreck preserve them blest,
Or take them from the storm, to everlasting REST.
