Slow down the West, Day's golden Orb retires
To bathe in Ocean its declining beams!
A fainter Red the glowing Aether fires,
And dewy Night her calm dominion claims;
With sable wings yon blushing Sky invades,
And pours a deeper Gloom o'er all the lengthen'd Shades!

No more the View detains th' enraptur'd Sight,
But Mists condensing down the spacious Plain!
Yon Spires scarce glimmer with departing light,
And Darkness rushes o'er the rural Scene,
While pleas'd the Peasants from their labour hie,
Bless Ev'ning's friendly Star, and to the Cottage fly!

All Nature rests &mdash; The Breeze forgets to blow!
No Sound wakes Echo from her mossy bed!
With gentler lapse the languid Currents flow,
And Sleep and Silence 'round their poppies shed!
Thy notes alone, sweet plaintive Philomel,
Soothe the lone Hermit's ear, and lure him from his Cell!

And see, bright Cynthia from th' etherial Steep
On ev'ry Mountain sheds a solemn gleam!
Her trembling Glories paint the wat'ry Deep,
And add new lustre to the silver Stream,
Along whose banks at Midnight's witching hour
(So wayward Fancy dreams) aerial Beings pour!

Now beams the Hour to Contemplation kind,
When Truth conducts her o'er th' afflicting Scene!
Exalts to Heav'n the philosophic Mind,
And bids Composure o'er the Passions reign!
Thrice happy State, when dawns fair Wisdom's day,
Dawns on the calmer breast, and darts th' all-chearing ray.

Hail, awful Goddess, Star-invested Night,
With conscious joy I count thy silent sway!
Though unattir'd in robes of gaudy Light
And idle Splendours of delusive Day!
Thy wish'd Approach more pleasing Beauties grace,
Mild Contemplation, Thought, and Heav'n-descended Peace!

Soft falls the Veil on peace-consuming Woes,
And calms indulgent ev'ry rising Sigh;
O'er rustic Labour breathes a deep repose,
And seals at length Ambition's watchful eye:
Disarms the rage of fell Disease and Pain,
And binds the fetter'd Captive in a gentler Chain!

'Tis thine to bid the letter'd Student pore
O'er grave Antiquity's instructive page,
Unlock to view each Author's sacred store,
And pleas'd enjoy the Labours of an Age!
Thus Virgil studied, ere his Troy he sung:
Thus TULLY form'd the Thunders of his Patriot-Tongue!

Thy starry Mantle o'er Olympus spread
With num'rous gems reflects the Maker's praise:
Each Orb from Light's eternal Fountain fed
In mute Devotion pours th' incessant rays!
Silence, how eloquent!  and Praise, sincere!
And canst thou, impious Man, the rapt'rous Vow forbear?

Shall Nature raise her Incense-breathing Voice
To hail the All-Beneficent on high?
Shall Seraph-Bards in endless hymns rejoice,
And Thou alone th' indebted Thanks deny?
With Eye unmov'd such great Examples see?
Nor wilt thou LIVE for Him, who gracious DIED for Thee?

Exalted Kindness claims a just return,
But what return can wretched Mortals make?
What tho' with Gratitude, with Love they burn,
Vain is their Pow'r, and all their Grandeur weak!
In vain their Sacrifice wou'd Heav'n invite;
Oblations bribe it not, nor sumptuous Shrines delight!

Know Fools, 'tis Innocence that Heav'n requires,
The Tear o'er Misery benignly shed!
Religion's chaste, yet never-dying fires,
And Hope soft-smiling on Death's gloomy bed,
While Faith, bright Seraph, to Reflection's eye
Paints heav'n-descended Scenes, and endless Extasy!

Such joys thy Suppliant grant, propitious Pow'r!
Unknown to Business and the venal Throng!
To seek Retirement in some rural Bow'r,
Nor yet inglorious breathe the moral Song:
There Health, Content, and letter'd Ease shall shine,
There Hymen crown his Bard, and render Celia mine!

There too, when Fate's irrevocable doom
Shall lay me silent in sepulchral Clay,
With tears Philander shall bedew my Tomb,
And grace my Manes with the pensive Lay;
With pious sorrow o'er my Ashes mourn,
And Peace light-weave her pinions 'round the Poet's Urn!
