Ah!  who that mingles with the cares of life,
But knows the mournful luxury of tears?
Ah!  who, familiar with affection's strife,
But often mingles mirage with his fears?
Nor unappall'd, nor in despair he hears
The trump of fate &mdash; the tempest of distress
And trembling shrinks &mdash; till tranquil Heaven appears,
Calms its wild rage, and bids his griefs confess
The God that rules the storm, and bids the tempest bless.

So have we seen the wretched pilgrim fly,
From storms impending, to some shelter near,
When, lo!  a sudden tempest sweeps the sky,
And bids the threat'ning danger disappear.
So now beclouded, and alternate clear,
So bright &mdash; so gloomy was her various way;
And so was heaven to Christiana dear,
In all the changes of His righteous sway,
In all the gloom of night &mdash; in all the glare of day.

She was &mdash; what others only wish to be;
She did &mdash; what many but resolve to do;
She had &mdash; what some but at a distance see,
Aspiring still to brighter worlds in view.
She lived, intent her Saviour to pursue,
With faith unfeigned, and unfeigned love;
Eager to urge her steady journey through,
To that bright world of blessedness above,
Where saints shall deathless joys, and glorious triumphs prove.

'Twas her blest task, by gracious heaven assign'd,
To train the rising plant and guard its bloom;
To "pour instruction o'er the tender mind,"
And wait till fruit to fair perfection come.
Some had her tears &mdash; her prayers, her praises, some;
And some, the censure of her gentle tongue:
Her life fair lessons taught beyond the tomb;
And led her charge through virtue's paths along,
To worlds of fair delight, and scenes of endless song.

But ah!  no more the rising plant shall know,
Shall feel the sun-shine of her smile, no more!
Oppress'd with death we saw the matron bow,
And lo!  the short-liv'd blessedness is o'er,
That heart is cold, where love did once adore!
That tongue is silent now, where grace did reign:
Nor rolls that eye, once eager to explore,
The cot of poverty &mdash; the couch of pain!
Nor shall that eye, or tongue or chide, or bless again!

Is there, of all her bless'd tuition form'd,
Who wished the triumph of her worth to share?
Is there whose heart with modest virtue charm'd,
Would faithful copy her maternal care?
And, like their long lov'd governess, prepare,
By humble virtue for a happy seat,
Where saints rejoice, and ever bright and fair.
Angels in glorious happiness complete,
Crown their exalted King, and worship at His feet?

Here hasten then &mdash; and mark her noble flight;
See where her spirit wins its rising way;
For now she mingles with the saints in light,
And gains the splendours of immortal day.
There seraphs sing, and saints in white array
Swell the glad chorus of seraphic joy;
There angels all their heavenly charms display
And there Christina, with exulting tongue,
Bids loud salvation flow through endless years along.

EPITAPH.
There, silent slumbers in the peaceful grave,
What once was active, generous, and fair;
Ye proud behold it &mdash; and ye daring brave,
Confess the triumph of a Christian there.
Say &mdash; what on earth most merits human care?
In virtue, honour &mdash; or in conflict, ease,
Say &mdash; what in heaven a Christian hopes to share,
Where bliss immortal all its charms displays?
That was her care &mdash; her hope &mdash; her character &mdash; her praise!
