Come, gentle Spring, I court thy fragrant gale,
Whose healthful freshness drooping nature cheers;
No more the sullen wintry storms prevail,
But in the glade the violet sweet appears:
In woodlands green the lonely shepherd hears
The blackbird trill his rich and amorous song,
While, as her silver crest pale Hesper rears,
In accents soft, yon solemn groves among,
Responsive nightingales the liquid notes prolong.

Fair is thy form, in flowery vest array'd,
And blythe the train that on thy steps attend:
How chang'd the scene which late the eye survey'd,
When Eurus made the leafless forest bend,
And the bleak snow-storm on the plains descend;
When hapless birds, no friendly shelter nigh,
No curious nest it's downy aid to tend,
Dropp'd the cramp'd wing, and clos'd the glist'ning eye,
And, seiz'd by torpid sloth, sunk on the ground to die.

The lighten'd soil, from icy bonds releas'd, 
Smiles with the verdure of the rising blade;
Hope springs exulting in the rural breast,
The husbandman beholds his toil repaid.
He sees the waving corn, the harvest laid
In his rich barns, and while he hails thee, Spring,
With jocund songs, forgets thy changing shade,
The storm that nestles in thy brilliant wing,
And lingering wintry frosts, that disappointments bring.

Yet sprightly power, to hope &mdash; to joy allied,
All nature triumphs in thy gentle sway;
Thy valleys fair, with rising grain supplied,
Thy primrose banks, and daisied meads so gay,
Thy blossoms swelling on the fruitful spray,
Thy breezy hills, with sportive lambkins crown'd,
Thy vocal groves, thy verdant woods display
The life, the pleasure, in thy presence found&mdash;
On thee the morning smiles, thee evening's sweets surround.

Delightful Spring!  I hail thy welcome reign,
And bless the hand that form'd thee bright and fair;
Yet while thy beauties deck the flow'ry plain,
And nature joys in heaven's paternal care,
When shall those moral wastes that bounty share,
Which sterile long beneath the wintry gloom,
No plants of grace, no trees of glory bear;
But sapless, withering boughs, that never bloom,
Nor lovely to the sight, nor rich with sweet perfume.

Blest Britain!  though around thy favour'd isle,
Firm as thy rocks truth's sacred bulwarks stand;
Though on thy sons the arts and graces smile,
And virtue bless, and science cheer thy land;
Though rising bright at heaven's supreme command,
The gospel-sun on thee resplendent shine,
Yet Asia's plains, and Afric's wastes of sand,
Uncultur'd still in barren darkness pine,
Nor hail the cheerful spring, nor see the light divine.

Long torpid in the deep and dreadful gloom
Of heathen winter, their sad sons have sate,
Surrounded by the terrors of the tomb,
Awaiting fearful their impending fate,
While hell's dread prince, with horrid joy elate,
By fiends of darkness rules his wretched prey,
And superstition, cruelty, and hate,
Deform their lives, and bear their souls away,
To future scenes unblest, and far from heavenly day.

Oh when shall spring these lonely deserts cheer!
Who shall the vivifying power bestow!
Hark!  what sweet sounds salute the listening ear,
From Sion's hill melodious numbers flow:
"The wilderness refreshing showers shall know,
The solitary place with pastures spring,
The Rose of Sharon in the desert blow,
The captive exile freed shall rise and sing,
Salvation to his Lord, and glory to his King."

Yes!  on the breeze e'en now the shout ascends,
The distant isles Emmanuel's presence hail,
To heathen lands Messiah's name extends,
The quickening Spirit bids the truth prevail;
Nor shall the great, the glorious promise fail,
Zion her converts shall in triumph shew,
The gospel feast earth's fainting sons regale,
Till in full tide the Gentile glory flow,
And the whole ransom'd race their great Redeemer know.

Oh when shall time the wond'rous scene disclose;
What zeal shall to Jehovah's charge aspire;
E'en now the Seraph to the altar goes,
And waits to touch the hallow'd lips with fire;
E'en now the sacred mystic THREE inquire,
What hand the high commission will receive,
What ardent bosom glows with strong desire,
Salvation to earth's utmost bounds to give,
And bid a dying world, through Christ the Saviour live.

Oh Albion!  upon whom heaven's glories shine
Bright as the beams which gild thy emerald flood;
Say, wilt not thou accept the charge Divine,
And bid the waiting isles behold their God?
Yes, thou hast heard, and at Jehovah's nod
Swift o'er the waves thy gallant vessels fly,
Already have thy feet the mountains trod,
And in the wilds thy joyous accents cry,
"Prepare, prepare the way, behold Messias nigh."

Herald of peace, blest messenger of joy,
Thy beauteous feet th' admiring heathen hail,
May every nation join thy high employ,
Till o'er the earth celestial truth prevail:
Then, lovely Spring, thy pure and healthful gale
Shall with a sweeter, richer fragrance blow,
Than that which scents Arabia's spicy vale,
Where od'rous shrubs, and flowers perennial grow,
And soft, with liquid lapse, refreshing fountains flow.

The dreary wilds, where winter held so long
His gloomy, barren, unmolested reign,
Shall sweetly echo to the vernal song;
The woodlands hear the turtle's tender strain,
In verdure bright, the rich and fertile plain
Its promis'd harvest shall with gladness bear,
For briars and thorns the rose shall bloom again,
And living trees expand their foliage fair,
Till nature rise renew'd, and earth with heaven compare.
