In golden glory sunk the setting Light,
And softest shadows sweetly cover all;
No sound is heard to usher in the night,
Save the low murmur of yon water-fall.

This is the lonely, quiet breathing hour,
When Contemplation wears her sob'rest mein;
When sombre Fancy best exerts her pow'r
And gives new life to scenes that once have been.

Now, o'er the strange vicissitudes of time,
Let me awhile with pausing footsteps brood,
And learn indelibly this truth sublime,
That "Virtue only is a real Good."

Ah!  who these hoary Ruins can survey,
Where adders hiss, and boding owlets scream,
And not recal great Villiers' festive day,
The Sage's lesson and the Poet's theme?

How oft, at rosy morning's earliest smile,
Rous'd by the clangours of the echoing horn,
He joy'd to share the hunter's glorious toil,
O'er broomy hills and shadowy vallies borne!

While many a frolic youth, from southern lands,
His low companions in endear'd excess;
Delighted, emulate the rustic bands, 
Who, fir'd with praise, to every danger press.

And as triumphant from the devious sport,
With wearied step return'd the mirthful crew;
How would they round their gen'rous chief resort!
Charm'd with the wildest sallies Wit e'er knew.

But lo!  the board with ev'ry viand grac'd,
And, goblets bright, with care dispelling wine,
And num'rous guests in gay disorder plac'd
And mirth, and song, and revelry divine.

Yet Reason, Fancy, Taste, were all their own;
Ah why, alas!  not these alone preferr'd?
The intellectual contest sure had shone
Without the grovel of the sensual herd!

But mute, as now, was each deserted wall,
Whene'er their lord preferr'd his Cilveden's charms,
When gaily held in yielding Beauty's thrall,
Life flew unheeded in his Wanton's arms.

Ah!  me, the brilliant race of Vice how short!
Tho' monarchs honour'd, and a world admir'd:
Diseas'd and bankrupt, friends no longer court,
And reft of all, sad Buckingham expir'd!

No pomp of woe attends his niggard bier;
By lowest hinds unfeeling borne along;
Nor anguish'd sigh, nor sympathetic tear,
Repress'd the censures of the vulgar throng.

How happier he, the humblest cottage swain,
Who, far from all the riot of his lord,
In some sweet corner of this wide domain,
Saw ruddy Health adorn his temp'rate board!

Saw in his offspring every open grace.
Beauty's bright bud, and Virtue's winning smile:
And felt a Wife's affectionate embrace,
Benign oblivion of returning toil.

Who own'd the Power that o'er all presides,
And liv'd in meek subjection to his law;
Mourning the wit, that frantickly derides
The Name, pronounc'd with universal awe.

Though wretched, misdirected Genius scorn'd,
In soft complacency he clos'd his eyes:
By all he lov'd in life sincerely mourn'd,
And sad and solemn were his obsequies.

Oh may this soothing truth impress my heart,
That lowliest Virtue is a richer prize,
(Howe'er contemn'd by fools without desert,)
Than all the dread magnificence of vice.

So shall I not have view'd this pile in in vain,
While gayer scenes my gayer friends have mov'd;
So shall I hasten to these friends again,
Their humble worth with purer ardour lov'd.
