When kindly loos'd from his degrading chain,
Towards heaven's bright orb the golden eagle soars,
When his dark prison-house of grief and pain,
To the lone captive opes its pond'rous doors;
What feeling heart the gladsome change deplores?
What friendly bosom will in sighs complain?
What eye will weep, when to his native shores,
After long toiling on the storm main,
The mariner returns, to meet his friends again?

Nor yet for thee, from "mortal coil" releas'd,
For thee, great GEORGE, shall tears of sorrow flow.
For thou art pillow'd on the couch of rest,
After long conflict with a world of woe!
And now, methinks, I see thy spirit go,
With eagle swiftness towards that Fount of light,
Whose sacred beams, more pure than those below.
Purge from thick films the intellectual sight,
And fill the eye and mind with heavenly vision bright.

Yet, bending pensive o'er thy hallow'd bier,
Though not for thee she pours the plaintive moan,
Yet shall Britannia shed the filial tear,
O'er the lov'd ashes of a Father gone!
Yes!  though she sees him lay his burthen down,
A burthen borne through many a lingering day,
And though to gain a never-fading crown,
Joyous he soars on angels wings away,
Yet must she deeply feel, that he was once her stay!

How long, how steadfast, as her guardian rock,
He stood the bulwark of the island queen,
While o'er him many a surging billow broke,
And round his head, from gathering clouds were seen
Full oft, the vivid light lightnings flashing sheen.
Yet, though the tempest howl'd with sullen blast.
Or heaven's fair lights glow'd in the blue serene.
Yet stood he, in undaunted manhood fast,
Or o'er the cheerful scene, a heightening radiance cast.

Britannia!  when thy rival foe essay'd,
To plant his standard on thy emerald isle,
When hostile legions, hov'ring, hop'd t' invade
Thy fertile fields, where peace and plenty smile;
Thy sovereign arm'd thee for the glorious toil.
He rous'd the British lion to the war;
Yet kindly cheer'd and foster'd thee the while,
Thy ranks inspected with paternal care,
And gave the patriot's zeal the filial character.

But not in wild tumultuous scenes of strife,
Or idle whirl of pleasure's vapid dream.
Sought he to waste the precious hours of life,
But in the path that wisdom might beseem
Walk'd he with piety, for dear to him
Were the still joys which home's sweet circle bless;
And oft his glistening eye diffused the beam
Of rapture, kindled by the kind caress,
Which spoke a parent's love, a husband's tenderness.

Whence sprung those graces of his manly mind,
The patriot virtues of the father-king?
Religion!  it was thine, with touch refined,
His spirit under thy control to bring;
O'ershadow'd early by thy fostering wing,
He 'scap'd the deep, the treacherous snares of vice,
Of judgment, and of mercy he could sing;
And well he knew redemption's awful price,
And all his hopes reposed on the Great Sacrifice.

Himself illumin'd by celestial truth,
Instructed from the Oracles Divine,
Warmly he wish'd that every British youth,
Might share with him the benefit benign;
That knowledge might with piety combine,
To bless the humble cottage of the poor,
The beams of hope on darkling sorrow shine;
And suffering learn with meekness to endure,
The varied ills of life which only faith can cure.

Like Jesse's son, the royal bard inspir'd,
The atheist crew he banish'd from his sight,
Counsels nor services from those desir'd
Who dar'd contemn the Sovereign Infinite:
Honour and probity were his delight,
The steadfast purpose and the temper'd zeal
He spread his shield and buckler o'er the right,
Yet bold obtrusive error to repel,
Maintain'd his country's laws, his faith's firm principle.

He sleeps in peace!  yet shall recording fame,
That power which loves of virtuous deeds to tell,
To future years present great GEORGE'S name,
And on that name shall love and reverence dwell
While British hearts expand with grateful swell.
To him who from the pinnacle of state,
Taught them that those in dignity excel,
Whom, piety and virtue consecrate,
And whom the fear of God makes eminently great.

Oh Britain!  by his bright example taught,
Would'st thou this salutary truth receive,
T'would grace thee more than all thy sons have wrought,
And to thy crown a holier lustre give.
Long shall thy victories in remembrance live,
Thy triumphs gain'd in prostrate Europe's cause,
But fairer wreaths than conquest can conceive,
Are giv'n to those who keep Jehovah's laws;
They win eternal fame in the Divine applause.

Peace to thy shores!  may never hostile sword,
Stain the white foam that laves thy cliffs so fair;
Nor deadlier foes, though nourish'd at thy board,
Unnatural children, urge th' intestine war!
Be thou of love, of truth, of heaven the care;
And may the royal heir of Brunswick's line,
His happy people's warm affections share,
Long in his honour'd father's virtues shine,
And to succeeding years transmit the gift Divine.
