Ye mould'ring Domes and moss-encircled Tow'rs,
Where Ruin wide-extends her sad Domain,
Ye waving Pines, whose Gloom tremendous pours
A deeper Verdure on the lonely Plain,
Where close-insulting o'er the desart Land
The hoarse-resounding Ocean laves its rocky Strand!

Ye Monuments of Time's destructive Rage!
Ye faded Trophies of terrestrial Pride!
What sacred awe your Ruins sad engage,
How bid each Tempest of the Mind subside!
To softer Measures wake the moral Lyre,
While grave Instruction beams from ev'ry time-cleft Spire!

Here once bright Honour shed th' ennobling Beam
O'er each unsullied Virgin's orient Bloom
Here pure Devotion fann'd her vestal flame
And Peace reign'd awful in the Cloyster's gloom:
No voice of Grief taught Echo to complain,
But solemn Anthems swell'd the joy-inspiring Strain!

Here Contemplation, gentlest Hermit, stray'd
Along the verge of yon time-hallow'd Wood,
While Cynthia's beams quick-glancing thro' the Shade
Play'd on the Bosom of the crystal Flood;
And pensive Silence o'er yon flow'ry Vale
Hush'd ev'ry panting Murmur of the dying Gale!

Here Inspiration fir'd th' enraptur'd breast
And ardent breath'd th' enthusiastic Flame!
Soft lull'd the Virgin in celestial Rest,
Or sunk in sweet Excess her trembling Frame!
Peace shed her Balm o'er Life's severest woes,
While Scenes of bliss divine to kindling Fancy rose!

Where's now the View that charm'd the ravish'd sight?
Where now the Triumphs of industrious Care?
The green-rob'd Walks, the Flow'rs that breath'd delight,
And lent new Fragrance to the vernal Air?
The Matin Bell, that hail'd th' approach of Day?
The vocal Choir, that tun'd the grief-enchanting Lay?

What Objects here, but pensive Thought inspire?
What Sounds, but seem Mortality to mourn?
The ivy-mantled Arch, the moss-clad Spire,
The Column from the moul'dring Basis torn,
The Bat slow-wheeling thro' yon Ev'ning-Sky,
The Beetle's solemn Hum, and Owl's foreboding Cry!

Yet ev'n these solemn Terrours can invite
The Muse, enamour'd of the lonely Shade!
Beneath the peaceful Empire of the Night
Here oft she courts kind Melancholy's Aid,
With still attention eyes th' instructive scene,
Or lost in thought profound, soft-paces o'er the Green!

Full oft she listens to the moral Tale
Breath'd by the Genius of this sacred Plain,
While hoarse, responsive to the midnight Gale,
His sober Accents thus address the Vain,
In slumb'ring Souls awake etherial Fire,
And bid their new-fledg'd Hopes to nobler flights aspire!

"Ye thoughtless Fair, whose Charms meridian blaze,
Whom flatt'ring Crouds with humble vows adore!
Ye Great, whom Fortune's smiles fallacious raise,
On plum'd Ambition ever prompt to soar:
Attend!  To graver themes these Strains belong,
When Freedom sways the Muse, the Muse conducts the song.

"Survey yon Tow'rs! &mdash; Cou'd Life's securest pride
E'er boast such Beauty as They once display'd?
Ambition e'er on such a Base confide
As bade their Spires the distant Skies invade?
Yet see!  reclin'd they load the desart Ground,
While Time triumphant waves his sable Plumes around.

"Fond Man, why vaunt the glories of an Hour,
Frail Fancy's dreams, and visionary peace?
The tinsel Pomp and Pageantry of Pow'r,
Wit's idle Mirth, and Beauty's transient grace?
What second Spring alas!  restores thy Bloom?
What faded Charms of thine, their former pride resume?

The meanest Plant on Nature's flow'ry vest
Enjoys, to Thine, a far superiour Fate,
By Time's kind hand in native lustre drest;
Nor mourns (like thee) inclement Winter's hate!
Successive Springs the Rose's youth repair,
And the pale Lilly fades, to bloom again more fair!

"Virtue alone shall dare Time's utmost pow'r!
Shall view his Malice with unsullied eye!
Bid Hope beam chearful o'er Affliction's hour,
Bid Christian faith suppress the rising Sigh;
And while vain Beauty sinks in endless Gloom,
Shall triumph over Death, and disappoint the Tomb!
