Slow from the surface of the glassy stream,
The misty vapor climbs the mountain's height,
From tinted clouds, with soft and shadowy beam,
Breaks the first radiance of returning light:
The giant sun, in golden splendour bright,
Thwart the grey twilight darts his dazzling rays,
Then bursts majestic on the wondering sight;
And fair creation's smiling face displays,
Serene in soft repose, and fresh with orient grace.

Peace strays delighted o'er the tranquil scene,
Yet wakes not Echo with her silent tread,
So soft her footsteps on the dewy green,
That e'en the yellow cowslips lowly head,
Bends not, it's liquid, glistening gems to shed:
No sound invades the stillness of the grove,
Save falling drops from spangled leaves outspread;
The tender plainings of the turtle dove,
Or notes of sweetest birds, who chaunt their songs of love.

Devotion, come!  the soothing scene survey,
For nature's rest is sympathy with thee,
Hallowing the blest, the consecrated day,
First hallow'd by creating Deity;
When free from stain, from all disorder free,
Earth's beauteous frame before him stood complete;
He saw transfus'd his own felicity,
And gave the Sabbath as the transcript meet,
Of heaven's supreme repose, his highest, holiest seat.

Bright was that day to sacred worship given,
That temple worthy of the guest Divine,
And meet the anointed minister of heav'en,
To offer incense at that hallow'd shrine:
The praises of creation to combine;
Creation new, and beautiful, and good,
Whose silence magnified the power benign,
While Adam, hierophant of nature, stood,
And hymn'd in strains divine, her joy and gratitude.

He sung, and angels left thy etherial clime,
To sound his notes of harmony and love;
But ah!  no more the raptur'd song sublime,
From Eden rises to the courts above;
Hush'd is the music of the vernal grove,
The roses faded in the fragrant bowers;
The cherish'd seat of purity and love,
Is guarded now by stern avenging powers,
Whose glittering sword of flame, th' intruder bold devours.

Then gathering clouds the holy mount conceal'd,
Tempestuous darkness veil'd Jehovah's face;
The hosts of hell in dreadful phalanx wheel'd,
Through the drear regions of untravell'd space,
To seek on earth, a fairer happier place;
Usurp'd the throne of Majesty Divine,
And taught the faithless, abject race,
 To kneel as suppliants at Apollyon's shrine,
 Though round him, falchions gleam, and fires destructive shine.

Loud vaunted then, the dire infernal crew,
And impious dar'd the Mightiest in his ire,
The shafts or death like arrowy lightnings flew,
And helpless, hopeless, stricken crowds expire:
But haste, to your own dark abodes retire,
For see, ye fiends, the dread avenger nigh!
He comes!  but not on rolling wheels of fire,
He meekly comes, to bear the yoke and die,
And conquer in the groan, the gasp of Calvary!

Thou glorious sun!  whose pure and living ray,
Now quickenest nature after winter's gloom,
How didst thou shine on that triumphant day,
When bursting all the barriers of the tomb,
Thine earliest beams beheld the Saviour come!
Victorious, laden with the spoils of hell,
On sin, and death, to pass their final doom,
And to the world, the ransom'd world to tell,
Of hope, and heav'n restor'd, and bliss unspeakable!

Welcome, blest tidings of ecstatic joy,
Welcome, blest morn that brought that joy to light,
While angels on this theme their harps employ,
In hallow'd songs, let saints on earth unite;
Their risen Master hail with glad delight,
With weeping Mary, in her transports share,
Cling to his feet, 'ere yet the convoy bright,
Bend the blue heavens, and cleave the liquid air,
And to his lofty throne, the King, the Conqueror bear.

Yes!  'tis the Music of the heavenly plains,
Whose echo on the ambient ether dies:
Messiah in his heavenly kingdom reigns
And seraph songs to higher raptures rise;
There his disciples turn their wistful eyes,
Like those whom once at Olivet he blest;
Again expect him from the crystal skies,
When for the great, the glorious banquet drest,
They hope with him to rise, and share his endless rest.

O glorious hope!  more sweet than sounds Divine,
By angels whisper'd to the saints in death;
Yes!  this frail dwelling shall it's guest resign;
But lo!  the kind, the pitying Saviour saith,
"My gracious hand shall take the parting breath,
My guardian power the sleeping dust defend,
My voice shall echo through the realms beneath,
Death, and the grave, to the dread summons bend,
And to their shining thrones, the just with me ascend."

Then shall that morn its radiant light disclose,
That Sabbath break whose sun shall ne'er
When weary spirits, bath'd in soft repose,
Shall contemplate the excellence Divine,
Adoring worship at that awful shrine,
That temple, where the Lamb his light displays;
Effulgent in reflected glory shine,
For ever brightening in the beamy blaze,
Of goodness, beauty, truth, diffusing endless rays.

Is this thy close, thy archetype sublime?
Then hail, blest emblem of a rest so fair,
Who risest on the glimmering dawn of time,
As beams with trembling light the morning star,
Presaging perfect day, not distant far;
Sweet are the Sabbath hours, it's worship sweet,
And oft it's sainted songs my spirit bear,
To that blest moment, when around his seat,
All in their Father's house, his family shall meet.
