Hail SCOTIA, realm of ancient might,
Renown'd for matchless deeds of fight;
Though spread with rugged mountains round,
Though bleak thy air, and bare thy ground,
Let others boast a milder air,
And fields with richer plenty fair,
A noble praise belongs to thee,
The courage of the brave, and spirit of the free!

Thy mountains Roman power defied,
Repulsed their armies, check'd their pride,
And Rome from Scottish courage found,
Its universal empire's bound:
These mountains, of the brave the seat,
Gave freedom still its last retreat,
Our Sires, assailed by numbers, stood,
There braved the source of foes, and poured their generous blood.

Long were they press'd by stronger foes,
And fierce the strife of battle rose,
To numbers forc'd to quit the field,
But never basely known to yield;
For rights attack'd by party-rage,
They fought and died through ev'ry age,
Till freedom crowned their generous toil,
Bade peace adorn the land, and plenty bless the soil.

Now Commerce spread her swelling sails,
Invoked the aid of friendly gales,
And dar'd in quest of wealth explore
The products of each distant shore;
Arts, smiling, followed in her train,
Together Arts and Commerce reign,
And, frightened long by hostile rage,
The Muse, with peace restored, inspired the classic page.

EDINA, to thy sons belong
The meeds of Science and of Song;
Thine seldom gained in modern days
The palm of the Historic praise;
Thine Med'cine's salutary art,
Skilled aid more powerful to impart;
Thine, what, or useful, or refin'd,
Can strengthen, or adorn, improve, or please the mind.

But to the SCOTTISH Muse's sway,
While distant vot'ries homage pay,
And seek, assembled from each shore,
EDINA'S walls, in quest of lore,
See, the rude work of ancient hands,
The fav'rite seat of Learning stands;
No costly art, nor strength displays,
A mean and shapeless pile, that with each blast decays!

While Commerce, with unsparing hand,
Diffuses riches through the land,
In the gay square, and crowded street,
While works of art and wealth we meet,
And thus enlarged, adorned to view,
EDINA seems to rise anew;
Shall this alone, the nation's stain,
Thus meanly poor, and rude, shall Learning's seat remain?

No more &mdash; Methinks I see the wall
Already tottering to its fall!
Methinks I see the rising pile
The future glory of our isle!
Ye rich, and great, the tribute pay,
Your bounty here, your taste display,
With liberal hand the structure rear,
Whose fame, nor sudden rage, nor slow decay, shall fear!

Already in the grand design
See art and opulence combine!
While wealth affords the rich supplies,
See, planned by art, the structure rise,
Where strength and beauty claim a place,
And regularity and grace,
Simple, yet great, adorned, yet plain
Abode, where every Muse, and every grace may reign!

Seat of the learned and the polite,
There science shall with taste unite,
And there again, no more deplored,
Another Athens be restored,
While crowds admiring shall repair
In quest of distant knowledge there.
Thus said the Muse, &mdash; and bade me pay
Sincere, though small, the tribute of a lay!
