Fast by yon hallow'd grove where ISIS greets
Her sister CHERWELL with a kind embrace,
Where contemplation scatters all her sweets,
And peace and science sanctify the place,

My footsteps wander'd.  Nature all was still,
Save where returning rooks, with croking tales,
Save where the bats, on leathern pinions, fill
With solemn skreeches the responsive vales.

With smoother eddies flow'd the purling streams,
In gentler tides they sported with the breeze,
With brighter rays reflected Cynthia's beams,
And softer zephyrs play'd among the trees.

There, as I oft was wont, the Muse I woo'd,
The Doric Muse, and tun'd my oaten reed;
When ISIS, rising from the dimply flood,
In "silver slippers" reach'd the shore with speed.

"While from her hair the falling dew she press'd,"
In mimic fancy stood the guardian Queen;
Known by the sedgy wreath her temples grac'd,
And "by her stole" (forsooth) "of glossy green."

A gracious smile upon "one" cheek appears,
And "one" bright eye speaks pleasure to my soul;
While from the "other" drop the trickling tears,
Scalding the shrivel'd visage as they roll.

Onward she hied; &mdash; majestical and slow,
With her "right" leg full solemnly she trod;
Like Undertaker, who, in sabled woe,
Leads some grave Student to his last abode:

Yet with her "left" she lightly tript the glade,
As o'er Parnassus trips it CLIO gay;
Or as a debtor, of fell duns afraid;
Or morris-dancer on the first of May.

Where Greenwich, or where Chelsea's domes ascend,
The maimed vet'ran thus I've often seen,
With his sound limb on tip-toe lightly bend,
Then halt abruptly on his wooden pin.

Thus have I sometimes mark'd a pamper'd priest,
By gout afflicted, dance in rueful woe,
If, by design, or accident, I prest
Mine erring foot on his emflannell'd toe.

"No more, fond youth, the seats of shepherds sing,
No more of grove, or myrtle bow'r, (she cry'd);
To things of higher daring sweep the string,
For know, within this year AUGUSTUS died,

"And yet AUGUSTUS lives &mdash; a mighty theme!
(And benefices fat may be the boon;)
AUGUSTUS, living, joyous gave to fame,&mdash;
Lamenting still AUGUSTUS died so soon.

"Let all your bells bewail in doleful dump,
Let all your bells in joyful transport ring;
On one side muffled, let them thump, thump, thump,
Unmuffled on the other, ding, dong, ding.

"Go bid my sons in soft condolence grieve,
Bid all my sons in gratulations join;
Let them, to form a sumptuous chaplet, weave
The weeping Willow with the laughing Vine.

"Let ev'ry Muse her fragrant flow'rets bring,
And ev'ry shrub, to deck AUGUSTUS' hearse;
Then let them frolic round a living King,
In all the crouching flummery of verse.

"Let SWINTON lead the high-enraptur'd bands,
In notes which ne'er were heard in courts before;
Which, save himself, no mortal understands,
Selected from Palmyra's richest ore.

"HUNT shall his sweet Arabian incense show'r,
Fir'd by the Muse the grateful stream shall rise:
Caldaean oil let gentle WHEELER pour,
To wash affliction from the people's eyes.

"While some on HOMER'S warlike trumpet toot,
To VIRGIL'S manly harp let others sing,
HORACE'S lyre, or OVID'S softer lute,
Till with the chorus all my cloysters ring.

"All, all conspire, to whom th' indulgent Nine
Dispense the laurel, or Castalian tears,
This paragon of Garlands to entwine,
While Wharton trims it with his Critic sheers."
