On Benja's Bank, where vernal palm trees grow,
And rip'ning melons bend the fruitful bough;
Where genial gales blow round the cool retreat,
And heavenly Innocence has fix'd her seat;
In silent sorrow two brave warriors stood,
While the low Sun illum'd the silver flood;
With all the tenderness of grief they mourn'd,
Thus CALMA spoke, and BADAN thus return'd.

CALMA.
Oft have we met among these fruitful trees,
These blissful scenes of happiness and ease;
To join the dance around the dusky grove,
Each heart beat rapture, every soul was love;
In sweet succession flew our vernal hours;
O'er golden sands the Crystal riv'lets stray'd,
Harmonious murmurings through the greenwood shade.
But now, nor gold, nor happy youths remain,
With lightsome hearts to trip the painted plain:
From the rude billows rush'd the men of prey,
And bore our wives and children far away.
On the sad morn, unconscious of a snare,
They stray'd contented, for they knew no care;
Their forms were bright, as flow'rets wet with dew,
Their looks serene, as yon etherial blue,
And as the sun beams smile upon the lawn,
So bless'd they pass'd, but never to return;
A dreadful engine each fierce tyrant held,
That burst like thunder o'er the burning field.

Such were the men that boast Religion's zeal,
But drest with hearts that know not how to feel:
Oh, might they wander o'er the burning sand,
Eternal strangers to their native land,
With not one vernal shrub to cheer the eye,
Till their stern bosoms learn Humanity!

Oft has thy aged Sire, as day withdrew,
Told us sad stories, which we've found too true,
Till from his eye dropp'd many a silver tear,
And from his breast burst many a sigh sincere.

Such are the cares this bosom feels, my friend,
Cares which will grow, till life itself shall end:
But why thus wander on these Banks forlorn;
Why sigh for pleasures that must ne'er return;
When the loud war song echo's through the dale,
I'll bid my friends, these banks, and groves farewell,
To pour the horrors of the howling war
Along the scorching plains of Calabar,
Where on the whirlwind's wing the tyrant Death
Yells in the blast that sweeps the sultry heath.

BADAN.
Ere Care's sad gloom had ting'd thy infant hours,
To virtuous deeds I bent thy rising powers,
For in the orient bloom of artless youth,
I taught the precepts of immortal truth;
Taught thee the perils of the storm to brave,
And ride in safety o'er the foaming wave;
But oh!  fond youth, who taught thee to repine,
Sad are thy woes, yet can they equal mine;
Thy Sire, the great ALKNADOR, lived in ease,
Fell full of days, and died the death of peace,
But mine was murder'd on yon hated plain,
Nor one of all my relatives remain;
Yet did I murmur, did one sigh depart,
Did one sad tear spring from this aching heart?
&mdash;'Twas mute submission to the stern decree;
Firm I obey'd the weight of misery.
Blest is the man, and only he is wise,
Who can superior to his suff'rings rise;
Excessive Grief leads Reason far astray,
Our Gods who give may surely take away.
