ROSE.
Knight of the Catgut!  oily chief of men!
Friend of my fame, and partner of my pen!
Since well we know thy paragraphick skill,
Try if thy voice for once can match thy quill.
Wake the sad strain; &mdash; attend a patriot's hearse
With tristful numbers and lugubrious verse:
Apt is the time, illustrious is the theme,
Nor thou the meanest of the muse's team,
For oft' I've heard enraptur'd swine-herds tell
Sir JOSEPH MAWBEY sings not half so well.

BURGESS.
MAWBEY, base loon!  dare he with me contend?
What will not next these sow-gelders pretend!
Now, now 'tis plain rank envy fir'd his breast,
Me with mock fondness when he thus addrest:
"Rash youth!  in vain to luckless rhyme betrayed,
Leave not the pickle for the tuneful trade.
Lo, ambush'd criticks haunt the doubtful way;
Not thy own acid half so sharp as they!
But bounteous Europe spreads for thee her stores,
Her olives Spain, Westphalia sends her boars;
Oxford, that marked thy reason's earliest dawn,
Oxford &mdash; 'tis all she can! &mdash; shall send her brawn."
With artful counsel thus my ears he crams,
I smoaked his drift &mdash; but would not smoak his hams.

ROSE.
Sweeter than SALISBURY'S face with smiles o'er spread,
Or gales that blow from CAWTHORN'S addled head,
Or ended speech of ISAAC HAWKINS BROWNE,
Or BEAUCHAMP'S dinner paid for half-a-crown,
Or QUEENSBURY'S leer on damsels yet unripe,
Is thine, compared with MAWBEY'S squeaking pipe.

BURGESS.
No more: &mdash; but listen to the rueful rhyme,
For MARAT bleeds, and by a woman's crime!
Soon as through Paris the sad tale was spread
That numbered MARAT with the mighty dead,
Forth rushed the sea-nymphs from their fishy cells,
With frantick fury and terrifick yells.
His breathless corpse they bathe in tears of brine,
Sharp tears, &mdash; and genuine, as from juice of mine!
Quick to our shore the direful sound is blown
And Treasury scribblers echo moan for moan.
MARAT is dead &mdash; ah!  what avail our lies,
Stopt is their teeming source when MARAT dies.
Ne'er at his name, loud bellowed forth by PITT
Their peaceful fields contented boors shall quit,
For smoaking ruins leave their smoaking board,
Or pant to change the sickle for the sword.
Phrenzy no more shall rave of Sans Culottes
With air-drawn daggers brandished at our throats,
Of lisping infants at a gulp devoured,
Or Paris virgins more than once devoured.
Loud his sad death, ye kindred tygers, roar!
Loud his sad death, confederate Kings deplore!
Mark &mdash; at his call the tyrant hordes advance,
Led by grim ANARCHY to plunder France,
They fix the chains his murderous hands prepared,
They hang the wretches whom his knife had spared;
Crime urges crime, &mdash; for blood shall blood be spilt,&mdash;
A nation's mischief is a nation's guilt.
Mourn, scribblers, mourn your occupation lost
'Twixt murdered MARAT and imprisoned FROST;
Your useless ink-horns on his tomb reverse,
And your spilt goose-quills scatter round his hearse.
Pile o'er his dust, ye Treasury pamphleteers,
From pillories saved a hecatomb of ears;
With embryo paragraphs, a shapeless heap,
With CHALMERS rescued from eternal sleep;
With ALFRED'S letters struggling into books,
Redeem'd from grocers, and defrauded cooks;
Swell the sad offering to his deathless praise,
&mdash;So MARAT bids &mdash; and I will lend my lays.

ROSE.
BURGESS!  the accents of thy potent prose,
More than thy metre scarce invite to dose;
Now stretch thy ears &mdash; I see thou hast them yet,&mdash;
For MARAT loved my song, and praised my wit.

Hung between Heaven and Hell their lies a space,
&mdash;Unbreech'd philosophy can tell the place,&mdash;
Hid from the sun, impervious to his ray,
Where metaphysic light supplies a doubtful day.
There rebel Chaos her last post maintains,
Save a sung niche reserv'd in MITFORD'S brains.
High on a throne great MARAT, snatch'd from death,
Surveys from thence his precious works beneath;
Sees his own fire in holy YORK confest,
And his own venom glow in SHEFFIELD'S breast;
Sees cream-faced STANLEY turn of FOX his heels,
And LOUGHBOROUGH gently touch &mdash; and take the seals.
He sees gaunt RICHMOND, not unused to fright,
Raise in Tower-ditch ten batteries of a night;
Where, watched by geese, he braves presumptuous Gauls,
Scared by bold BERKELEY'S cackle from her walls.

O, bend propitious, while my song proclaims
Annual the feast to thee with annual games!
Far to the West a Vandal city lies,
Whence caitiff science, whipt and banish'd, flies,
Where High-church Reason bids a loyal mob
Preach, pillage, argue, burn, convict, and rob;
There flame thy altars, there thy shrine we raise,
While vestal poissardes guard the sacred blaze.
Thence smile benignant on our harmless sports,
Nor scorn the pastimes of anointed Courts.
First in their ranks thy civic sons appear,
REEVES in the van, and IMPEY in the rear;
Spies, affidavits, dungeons, whips, and axes,
Sure war, sure want, sure death, and surer taxes,
March in their train; next WATSON, hapless elf!
Shark bitten once, but now a shark himself.
To thee true homage by his leg he vows;
So shall it never join its brother boughs,
Ne'er to the sun its leafy pride shall spread,
When once by artist smoothed to match his head!
Here, a lank troop with PORCHESTER advance;
There TOMMY TYRWITT crowns the festive dance.
Nor absent he &mdash; well skilled in tripping tricks,
CARLISLE!  the blooming beau of &mdash; forty-six,
A smart debater, and a pretty vote,
Graceful to turn a sentence, or a coat,
Great judge of reasons, greater still of lace,
Great of the colours that become his face.
Exact to seasons, and to fashion true,
He chang'd his friends to change his ribbon's hue.
Such are thy triumphs!  such thy envied boast!
O, may these offerings soothe thy grinning ghost!
'Till hungry subalterns with RICHMOND dine,
'Till BEAUFOY'S brewage, shall be quaft for wine,
'Till SHUCKBOROUGH'S visage shall be less uncouth,
'Till LINCOLN'S Bishop shall be trapped in truth,
'Till self-conceit in PYBUS shall be cured,
'Till HARDINGE'S jokes shall be awake endured,
Or brainless ROLLO'S weight of scull surpass'd,
Thy praise, thy honours, and thy name shall last!

BURGESS.
What gifts, sweet ROSE, are to thy numbers due?
O, smooth in song, as in thy budgets true?
What mortal meed shall match these heavenly strains?
Take &mdash; take this German sausage for thy pains.
But soft &mdash; my HARRIOTT whispers at the door,
MARAT farewell!  for I can sing no more&mdash;
The Printer's Devil chides my long delay,
Scarce have I writ, one useful fib to-day;
Rest thou in death, for I my press must mind,
Dust be to dust, and lead to lead consigned!
