Etherial Pow'r, whose energy divine
Once touch'd the British breast with hallow'd fire,
With furtive steps I seek thy honour'd shrine,
And trembling touch the plaintive Lyre.
Alas!  no more, with sounding string
And manly voice, thy praise I sing:&mdash;
Lo, Terror spreads her gloomy reign,
And cold Suspicion chills the strain!
As waving high the Tyrant's Scrouge she views,
In mute amaze absorb'd deep sighs the drooping Muse.

Beneath this fretted rock, whose jutting brow
By the tough Oak, that braves the blast, is crown'd;
Let thy fond votary breathe his ardent vow
Nor ears unhallow'd catch the unlicensed ground;
By BRUTUS keen deep searching steel,
By the unerring shaft of TELL,
By HAMPDEN'S venerable shade,
By glowing CORDE'S vengeful blade,
Oh, stay thy flight, impell'd by just disdain,
Nor yet on soaring wing thy native skies regain!

Thus wail'd the Bard, when, from an azure cloud,
Celestial Light in bright effulgence shone;
Aw'd by the dazzling beam to earth he bow'd,
And ths the Goddess from her gleamy throne:&mdash;
Mortal, repress the bursting tear,
Banish every coward fear,
Indignant at atrocious wrong,
Be nerves of steel with vigour strong;
Destruction soon shall blast each Despot Horde&mdash;
While Freedom grasps the spear, and waves the glitt'ring sword.

Where Niagara pours his roaring floods,
The tawny Warrior speeds his trackless flight,
While length'ning files explore the lonesome woods,
Fir'd with disdain and eager for the fight.
The thickly tangled brakes among,
Gaily march the gallant throng.
Hark!  echoing thro' the winding dell,
Dismal sonds the savage yell;
Death mows the ranks aghast in dumb amaze,
So swift, from bush to bush, the rattling vollies blaze.

So, while a People, aw'd by Tyrant Pow'r,
In dread concealment breath'd th' indignant soul,
Oppression's Minions hail the jocund hour&mdash;
And proudly forge the Shackles of Controul!
'Till, sudden as the burst of light,
Myriads rouse their latent might;
Starting at the wild alarm,
Vengeance bares his blood-stain'd arm&mdash;
And, whelm'd beneath the Patriotic tide,
Lo!  every vestige sinks of big Despotic pride!
