Far in the North, where stands a Range of Trees,
Where Nature smiling feels the whisp'ring Breeze,
There's seen a Village which is fair and bright,
'Tis lovely all, it entertains the Sight.
Aurora, Cynthia, Phoebus, Phosphor shed
Their choicest Glories on it's rising Head.
It's various Beauties strike the wond'ring Eye,
Oft as the Morn does purple o'er the Sky.
The Houses that compose it all are plain,
One simple Throng, yet one agreeable Train;
Simplicity and Neatness there display'd,
Improve the Scene, and does the Landscape aid,
Sweet Summer decks the Place, and genial Spring renews the neighbouring Glade.
Here stands a Cottage on the painted Ground,
And there another is with Ivy crown'd.
The Village Tops in beauteous Prospect rise,
Grac'd by the Sun which warms the neigh'bring Skies.
There's interspers'd along the shining Way,
Things here and there which do their Charms display.
A Range of Huts which are detach'd from these,
Amuse the Fancy, and the Judgment please.
The mantled Green which does it's Foliage spread,
Springs o'er the Wood, and on it rears it's Head;
Amid the Leaves the gentle Zephyrs move,
Sport underneath, and thro' the Verdure rove.
The Entrance of the Village lovely seems,
By Brooks supply'd and wash'd by silver Streams.
Before the Doors which to the Huts belong,
The Women stand, the Ground the Children throng;
The little Boys and Girls together play,
By Cynthia's Light, and by the Solar Ray,
The Village rings with Joy each chearful Summer's Day.
Sweet Music sounds which country Swains admire;
The Church at Distance lifts it's pointed Spire.
Who passes by may with his Eyes behold,
The Stalls, where Apples, Pears, and Plumbs are sold.
There Colin lives on yonder Spot of Ground,
And Colinett is in his Cottage found;
There's Tom the Fidler he that strikes the Strings,
Delights the Rusticks while he sweetly sings.
Throughout the Village, through the charming Scene,
Fair Innocence and Friendship reign serene;
The streaky Green appears where fairy Elves
Each moon-light Night assemble by themselves:
Trees spread their Boughs and scented Flowers spring,
And on the House-tops feather'd Songsters sing;
The bleating Lambs run skipping up and down,
And with their artless Charms the Village crown.
Not Art, but Nature, thro' the whole's descry'd,
Divested of her Pomp and superfluous Pride.
The Priest who watches for the Village Train,
Is dear to every honest country Swain;
Good Humour softens all his god-like Speech;
Oh!  what a Joy it is to hear him preach.
He's chearful, courteous, tender, just and kind,
Allied to Virtue and to Peace inclin'd:
Humanity and Love, and Meekness fine,
Adorns the Man, and decks the whole divine.
Just as his Manners, is his Temper mild,
He has the native Sweetness of a Child.
The conscious Swains his wond'rous Virtues sing,
The neighbouring Places with his Praises ring:
For him the Shepherds touch the harmonious String.
There's few that's like him, very few indeed,
'Tis certain so it is by all agreed,
He studies much but prays and preaches more,
His Piety it is that joins his Lore:
No cooing Turtles half so gentle be,
The Zephyr's Breath is not so mild as he.
He wins by gentle Means and Methods rare,
He drives no Sinner into deep Despair;
Like his great Master is the Preacher fair.
Some wear the Gown to hide their growing Sin,
But he has ta'en it to be pure within.
He eloquently pleads the Needy's Cause,
Be his the Praise, and his the whole Applause.
The Man is blest, he in Religion shines,
Transcending famous Priests, and other learn'd Divines;
'Tis to his Honour that he loves to draw;
To him the Scriptures is a written Law:
He says the Gospel first for Man was made,
And that the Clergy ought to hear it read;
That 'tis their Duty to display it's Charms,
But not to dress it up with inconvenient Harms.
As soon as Titan gilds the rosy Morn,
The Village Priest trips o'er the dewy Lawn.
And o'er the verdant Plain he takes his Way,
He eyes th' Blue which speaks th' Almighty's Sway,
And then submissive kneels, before the God of Day:
And while Aurora spreads her Glories round,
The holy Preacher treads the silken Ground.
He's fond of Flowers, these the learn'd admire,
Flowers inform'd the Sage and did his Mind inspire.
He's done a thousand Things which merit Praise;
His christian Love his Charity displays:
Religiously he does the Sabbath spend,
Affirming 'twas ordain'd for such an End;
What Jesus taught and the Apostles spread,
By this the holy Man of God is led.
Smiling, he speaks all placid and serene,
And Reason's Sunshine, settles round his Mien:
He never swears, nor talks, nor jests obscene.
He is from Avarice and Ambition free;
The Village Parson does with all agree.
He loaths a sad unnecessary Pride;
Our blessed Lord condemns it too beside:
The golden Maxims which confirm the Whole,
Guides him thro' Life and sweetly tunes his Soul.
Since he has grown mature he's always trod
The Paths of Peace, because he loves his God;
He checks the Wicked, yet he wont revile,
Nor pens his Sermons in a florid Style.
The Parson's never at the Alehouse found,
Nor idly spends his Time, nor spreads Damnation round:
He dwells on no such wild phantastick Strain,
Which none but mad Enthusiasts maintain.
In Words distinct he does at Church relate,
The distant Glories of the future State:
Crowds hear him quickly with their outward Ears,
He sooths their Pains, he mitigates their Fears.
Some in the Pulpit prate and talk away,
Flourish to get a Name, and all their Arts display;
But he exhorts the Throng, with modest Speech, upon the Sabbath-Day.
From off his Tongue his melting Accents flow,
And when he talks the Preacher seems to glow,
His Merits all his long Discourses shew.
He feeds the Poor, Oh!  what a matchless Head,
The hungry Boys that's forc'd to beg their Bread:
With him the honest Village Tribe agree,
None is respected more, for none's so good as he:
He loves his Children and adores his Wife,
His pleasing Presence quick disperses Strife.
The other Day he sav'd a famish'd Child,
His Christian Love is so serenely mild.
He does his best, nay, more than what's requir'd,
He is by Christ, and by his God inspir'd.
At early Mattins he is constant there,
And so he is at other Hours of Prayer;
He makes his Flock his most peculiar Care;
He stretches out to all, his bounteous Hand,
And round the Bed of Sickness takes his Stand;
Dries up the Tears which often drown the Eyes,
Relieves the Orphan, stops the Widow's Cries.
He grows renown'd, tho' much he slighteth Fame,
To rise to Goodness is his glorious Aim;
Besides, he does in holy Works increase,
And seems a fair Perfection in one Piece:
He wont upon the Poor his Claims renew,
For rather than he'll strain, he'll go without his Due.
In this his Goodness is the more display'd,
Retaining what the great Messiah said;
Christ bade him first be kind, and Christ must be obey'd.
He the bright Son of Heaven's eternal Sire,
Does from his Followers christian Love require.
The Village Priest is always neat and plain,
He's known by walking with a fav'rite Cane:
The op'ning Bloom of Beauty decks his Years,
Conspicuous shines and in his Face appears:
Health sits upon his Cheek and crowns his Mien;
When Phoebus smiles the Parson seeks the Green.
Oh!  how he takes Delight to soften Woe,
It seems to be his Province here below:
From him as from above spontaneous Blessings flow.
Ye Strangers think not these are partial Lays,
Nor call the Muse too lavish in his Praise;
The Lamp of Day which gilds the azure Sphere,
Is Witness to his Worth which shines so clear:
And pale fac'd Cynthia with her silver Beam,
At Night beholds him worship the Supreme.
He, when the foolish Scene of Life is o'er,
Shall meet his God, shall meet to part no more.
And when his Soul at length shall leave his Clay,
He shall be borne to Realms of endless Day;
The Angels now which guard him in his Bed,
To waft him there their painted Wings shall spread.
Whene'er he quits this World, this Place of Woe,
He will to Heaven and endless Pleasure go:
Where the Good rest from Care, it must be so.
This Man of God, this sweet religious Soul,
Does not in Honours nor in Riches roll;
Can such a Saint, &mdash; can such a Christian die,
And not inherit Immortality?
His Virtues far surpass the fancied Kind,
With Goodness sweeten'd and with Charms refin'd;
This pious Priest, of whom the Muse has sung,
Breaths Mercy from his Lips and Softness from his Tongue.
