Bacchus, smiling god of fun,
Thou who rides upon a tun,
Thou who presidest o'er the barrel,
Inspire me now to write a carrol
On demi-reps in Gravel-lane,
To sing of Peter and of Jane.

But first avaunt!  thou little scorner,
Who deals in damning in the corner,
Of smirking phiz, of brow most stern&mdash;
Whose ale-house score's "of proof etern."

Ye nymphs of Venus, smiling train,
And stale old maids of Gravel-lane;
Virgins of twenty-one &mdash; if any,
Spinsters of fifty, who are many;
Ye Macaronies of three-score,
Belles half a century, and more;
Coy prudes, who have so long consider'd,
'Till your heads nod, "your hands seem wither'd;"
Attend my song, you're welcome in,
To drink your bitters with your gin.

But Oh!  immensity of trouble!
He spent his breath full two months double,
Ere Jane would deign to give her hand,
Vouchsafe to smile, leave squinting, and
Lie horizontal at command.

Said Cocky, make me but thy lord,
I'll find thee bed and ample board;
Preside in th' bar, rule i' the cellar.
Quoth Jane, "You are a story-teller."

Oh, fire and faggot!  retorted Peter,
While on his knees he thus did greet her;
"I'll place thee at my table head,
Before thee dainties shall be spread,
Fish, flesh, and fowl, and pidgeon pye,
With gravy beef." &mdash; Said Jane, "You lie;
For your affections all are laid
On Uncle Cent. per Cent's old maid;
Will. Chip's young Hannah, twenty more,
Thou sliley smack'd behind the door."
Some say Cocky's a testy fellow;
Some say he's stale &mdash; and some say mellow.

Oh!  burn my wig!  Death and the Devil!
Fair Damsel thou behav'st uncivil.
(Said Peter, while his eyes glar'd fire,
Arm'd with a tankard of entire)
Tho' sweeter thou than city custard,
Thou snap'st me by the nose like mustard.
'Tis true I doated once on Hannah,
Soft to the touch, and sweet as manna&mdash;
Chaste as Ephesian Diana.
If I can't please her, Blacksmith Will can;
For Venus should be join'd with Vulcan.
I never did intend to win her,
As I'm a publican and a sinner.
But what is she, compar'd to Janey,
Who once refus'd a quarter guinea?
Said Jane, Hush!  there's that son of law,
As sly a rogue as e'er you saw,
Seems quite enamour'd in his kisses,
And would have given me twenty pieces.
But curse your claret!  he's got dead drunk,
And in a deep sleep is his head sunk;
Lost to all sense, by no means can
He feel in bed the warming pan;
Can neither see, hear, laugh, or handle,
Nor dance, or kiss, nor hold the candle.
Poultney, who is to night our lodger,
Can't taste my lips &mdash; and much less *****.

Oh!  Damsel!  all the world know it,
And tell me I'm a rapt'rous poet,
For drenching porter, making rhymes,
And representing pantomimes.

Propitious prove, my fairest girl,
And warm my heart like Wilkes's purl.
Thou'rt mild and new, tho' I am stale;
Cling to my lips like Keeling's ale.
Thy lips taste of the sugar candy;
Thou &mdash; gin; thy breath is brandy.
Thou'rt clear as sack, as claret frisky;
Sweet cordial to my age as whisky.
Thou cinder girl of humble rank,
Prove salutary as my crank,
Oh!  thou art quite my bonum sum,
Thou art all milk, and I'm all rum!
Thou shalt have all my ready money!
I'll taste those lips &mdash; composed of honey.
If thou wilt but my muse inspire,
I'll raise thy head-dress higher &mdash; higher!
Keep not thy virtue 'till thou spoil it;
But take example by the pilot,
Whose wife, being laid in the clay on Sunday,
Married his maid the following Monday.
To night, my fairest, we'll be bedded,
And then &mdash; to-morrow we'll be wedded.
