Peace is the joy of heav'n, the happiness
Of earth, the wish of men,
And the delight of virtuous kings:
For peace AUGUSTUS, guardian of the globe,
Unwearied toils, and to be great
Is good; ev'n now he sends,
His delegates abroad,
To hush the hideous din of war,
And bind its furies, discord, and revenge,
Both threat'ning dire alarms, in everlasting chains.

Conjur'd, by statesmen's guile,
From hell their dark abode,
They hover o'er Europa's lands, and snuff
The scent of slaughter from afar,
In barb'rous triumph clasp their dusky wings
When the dread sounds of war
Ascend, and nations hurry to the field:
Now in the guise of amity, and love,
Inflame sedition, rouze
The world to arms;
Now storming furious, unrelenting, wild
For mischief, and a thirst for blood,
In all their horrors cloath'd
They rage athwart the earth,
Erazing towns, depopulating lands,
And blasting all the harmless pleasures of mankind.

But, tho' enamour'd with the charms of peace,
The monarch, for a while, withold his strength,
Collected, firm, resolv'd, and bears,
In quiet, proud Iberia's wrongs,
His goodness once refus'd,
And peace contemn'd, he'll give
Unbounded loose to ruin, arms,
And death, and shake her tyrant on his throne.
Already Britain's fleets have ravag'd wide her shores,
Have hurl'd destruction on her coward sons,
And, when their monarch wills,
Again will thunder out their rage, will dye
Yon hostile plains and seas with blood, assert
Their empire o'er the main, and curb the pride of kings.

So, when the providential eye of heav'n's,
Not seen to blaze
With dreadful majesty aglare,
And vengeance sleeps, mankind
Pursues its darling joys, and mocks
The pow'r divine; 'till, from on high,
The god, inexorable, fierce, descends,
And spreads his judgments o'er the frighted world:
Then roars the thunder, and the deluge rolls
Hugely destructive, then the earthquake shakes
The globe's foundations, and
All nature, agonizing, groans beneath his wrath.

But see!  in all her glory, peace
Appears, by justice led,
With plenty, in her train; a crowd
Of angels waft the sunny fleece
Along, that bears the glorious Load,
And fan the air with golden Plumes;
Down from the skies,
The grateful pomp illustrious comes,
And gladdens all below;
On Soissons, see!  it rests, to wait
The happy hour that speaks the lasting League
To Europe's sons:  already peace prepares
Her downy joys, and longs to shed them o'er
The tranquil globe; already bids her Fame
Be spread from east to west, and gratulates
The future, happy age for blessings hence deriv'd.

So, poets, feign of old, when storms
And tempests, with impetuous rage
Plough'd up the ocean, and deform'd the deeps,
Blue Neptune rose,
Serene in awful state,
With all the sea-gods in his trains,
And in a moment, smooth'd the surge,
Assuag'd th' indignant waves,
And breath'd a calm:
So Albion's Genius strides the hoary cliff,
And bounds th' intruding main;
Breaks the huge billow harmless on the strand,
Defends her trading sons, and guides
The shatter'd vessel safe to the expected port.

Mean-time, the KING, Britannia's KING,
Her guard, her glory, and delight,
Acclaims the blissful view,
And on his subjects safety builds his own;
To summer shades, and rural solitudes
Retires, t' indulge the pleasing thought,
And plan the future good
Of Albion's sons;
To taste an humble greatness, and relieve
His kingly cares with scenes of happiness and joy.

The grand resolves
Of state are o'er, and Patriots from their toils
Retreat; the season, far advanc'd,
Invites them to the leafy grove, the rill
Soft-murm'ring, the delicious view
Of greens, and flow'rs,
The various, opening landscape, widely spread,
Where mountains, woods, and towns,
Low vales, bright streams, and azure heav'ns
Invite the eye
To gaze with rapture, and inspire the soul
With plenitude of bliss, with bliss without allay.

Where sylvan warblers tune
Their mingling notes to native harmony,
And sooth th' enchanted ear; where Zephyr breaths
Delight, and from a thousand flow'rs,
Collects a thousand Sweets,
And fumes the wanton Gale;
Where ev'n the wild heath blooms, and nature smiles,
Along the gloomy waste,
In all her charms
Gay-blushing, fresh, and fair as in her earliest prime.

Be this the time, ye bards!  be this the time
To tune your numbers, and exalt the soul
With elevated verse; attend
The silent, solitary hour,
When cares, and woes, and agonizing thought are still:
When quality forsakes the noisy world,
And in the cooling grot, sits studious, while
The murm'ring stream descends,
While the wind waves the dancing boughs,
And ev'ry tuneful bird trills out his joys around.

Oh!  now attend, with all your melody,
And court the erring mind,
From false enjoyments, melt the barb'rous heart,
And, by insensible Degrees,
Reclaim the world:
To wise AUGUSTUS, glorious, great,
Majestick, born the favourite of heav'n,
And blessing of mankind, address the lay;
With gracious ear, with kind regard
He'll deign to hearken to the muse,
And, with his smiles, abundantly reward your toil.

Behold!  in yonder shade,
He sits alone, retir'd,
Divested of the pomp that waits on kings,
And aggrandizes courts;
Yet lone, retir'd,
Uncumber'd with his train,
How amiably great?
So looks an angel, sent from heaven to save
A kingdom, or preserve a state,
When his aethereal wings, his starry eyes,
And all the glories of his heavenly form
Are shaded in the guise of men:
The evening breeze for him blows cool,
For him the od'rous flow'rs diffuse their sweets,
For him the wild wood rings
With native musick, undissembled joy;
For him the glad creation blooms,
And a whole season lavishes its pride;
For him, its chiefest blessing, surest guard below.

Shall then the muse alone neglect
Her homage, or refuse
Her due obedience to the throne?
Come all ye Poets, all ye sons of verse,
Whom genuine worth, and noble flame inspire,
Come all, and, with sublimest songs,
Delight the monarch's solitude,
And doubly charm his studious hours:
But lo!  the forest bends without a blast,
The sylvan choirs forbear their lays,
The headlong current lulls
Its wave, and all is quiet as the tomb.
See!  see the muse descends, all bright
And fair, with heav'nly charms adorn'd,
Virtue and truth inspire her song,
And time conveys
It down thro' ev'ry age, secure from ev'ry change.

Behind her wait the rev'rend shades
Of Britain's elder bards
Cover'd with lawrels, laden with renown:
First, Chaucer, rough, unpolish'd muse,
Who, like the morning star
Upon the verge of night,
Lighten'd up his darker age:
Next Spencer grand, luxuriant, soft, sublime,
Fruitful of charms,
But, like a fertile soil, choak'd up with useless weeds.

Then Shakespear, rich in native worth,
Uncultivated, rude,
But noble, full, magnificent, and free;
The boast, the Pride
Of nature, and the shame of art:  his song
Rouzes the passions, and alarms the soul,
Commands attention, and, with wildest note,
Inspires a flood of pleasure thro' the heart.
Next Waller sweet,
Enchanting, airy, gallant, form'd to please
The fair, and, with persuasive wit,
Gay turns, and artless musick, charm the frolick mind.

There Milton stands with elevated front,
And eye sublime;
Unbounded, vast, and bold
His genius, matchless in its flame,
Its strength, its energy;
Swift, as the lightning glimpse,
It pierces to the soul,
Exalts its pow'rs, its faculties,
And, wing'd with rapture, bears
It to the skies, and opens ev'ry source
Of admiration, transport, love, esteem and joy.

Cowley the Pindar of the northern realms,
Irregularly bold, and rudely great,
Advancing bears aloft
The majesty of Brutus' name:
And sacrificing all
His trifling, witty songs, exults
In stronger numbers, and sublimer themes.
Otway and Lee succeed,
Unhappy men!  whom soft, bewitching strains,
And tragick melody could not secure
From poverty, disgrace,
And early death,
In vain their labours charm the list'ning throng,
In vain the mournful muses sorrow for their sons.

Behind, with various step, great Dryden comes
August with fame,
And sacred to the muse; a wreath
Of living bays adorns his awful head,
From ev'ry branch of poetry, and verse
His honours bloom, and to the end of time
His labours, and his praise shall live.
By him gay, hum'rous Prior stands,
The loves, the smiles, the graces in his train; with ease he charms,
With negligence instructs, tickles our faults
And laughs us into virtue:  Alma graves
A lasting glory on his tomb, nor less
The Nut-brown maid;
By turns we joy, we grieve, at his command,
And all th' unguarded soul's obedient to his lay.

There Addison, immortal name!
The great, the just, the good appears;
The wond'rous bard!
Who labour'd to reform mankind
From folly, and from vice,
And spent a life in the ungrateful toil:
Who sung the sweetest, noblest strain
With Homer's fire, with Virgil's art,
And dy'd at last lamented, mourn'd by half the world.

Next Phillips treads the green,
And wears a garland, from the Cyder groves
Fresh-gather'd, blooming like the spring; his muse
The first who dar'd to follow Milton's track,
And scorn, like him, th obstructive bands of rhime;
Who copy'd nature with incessant toil,
And, in exalted verse, describ'd
Her charms, his wish, his glory, and delight.
The last is Rowe,
Inimitably tender, soft, and sad,
Whose tragick strain impearls the virgin's eye
With artless tears,
And melts her heaving heart;
Who pours compassion on the barb'rous mind,
Who smooths the rugged, charms the wayward soul,
And, by the gentlest arts,
Allures mankind to deeds of amity, and love.

Nor these alone
Attend the goddess; lo!  the living Bards,
A num'rous crowd!  approach P&mdash;, T&mdash;n, Y&mdash;,
Great D&mdash;d&mdash;n, the joy of ev'ry muse!
An hundred more,
(Grown old in verse, deserving fame,
Tho' injurd in malicious rhimes)
Prepare to join the general song, and charm
The monarch in his cool retreat.
'Tis silence all around,
And expectation sweet
Awakes the sleeping soul, and animates her pow'rs.

She gives the sign!
The Goddess gives the sign!
And all at once from ev'ry lyre,
The well-concerted notes together rise,
And, in repeated circles, tune the vocal breeze;
Echoe, from far, sighs back the feeble strain,
Soft-warbling thro' the summer shade,
And fainting down the stream
Melodious dies.
Again 'tis silence, and the muse herself
Begins the mutual off'ring of th' assembled bards.

Already, Mighty Prince!
Your grateful realms have welcom'd you to rule
With loud applause, and spoke,
Their high opinion of your worth; have hail'd
You as their guardian genius, and invok'd
Continual blessings on your reign:
To all, to each peculiar band,
Your gracious words have giv'n delight,
Have comforted their souls,
And breath'd an earnest of succeeding joy.
At last the muses come,
And to your fame devote the utmost of their toil.

O lend a favourable ear,
Illustrious GEORGE!
And, as the greatest, be the best of Kings:
Let not the sons of learning only mourn
Their slighted vows,
But deign to hear their songs,
And bless their labours with approving smiles;
So shall their names again revive,
And arts, and empire hold a long, united rule.

'Tis true no high alliance, no extent
Of pow'r attends the Poet's verse;
No sums of gold,
No outward grandeur recommends his lays;
No conquest in the bloody field,
No cunning in the statesman's art:
Yet honour deigns to wait
His musick, and obey his lore.
The virtuous, living Prince shall see,
In each exalted song,
His actions brighten into fame,
Posterity applaud the wond'rous Tale,
And read, with growing rapture, the immortal strain.

By this great Caesar lives
In Virgil's verse,
And makes eternity his own;
While all his wealth, his pow'r,
His tides vanish like a cloud away,
And scarce their track remains:
Let us explore the Heroe's tomb, remove
The nameless rubbish from his grave,
Examine ev'ry stone, each trace
Of ancient sculpture, all the moulder'd heap
Of pompous trophies rear'd to his remains,
And hallow'd with his name,
Dust, trophies, sculpture, tomb, are lost,
And Time has ev'n disdain'd to mark the place:
No, no, great Cesar's fame
In song alone survives, and the Historian's page.

Yet more, when grief, and love,
And royalty combin'd
Have rear'd the noblest sepulchre, where wealth,
And art have blended all their charms,
Where nations have admir'd the frame
And volumes huge describ'd
The rich materials, and the builder's skill,
Stands there a single stone
To note the cancell'd grave, or tell
Th' Enquirer where it stood?
In vain the Carian Queen inshrin'd her dear,
Her long lamented spouse in such a tomb
As charm'd the wond'ring world,
And, lavishly profuse,
Wasted a kingdom's wealth upon his urn:
Revolving years ran round its base,
And, with insensible decay,
Levell'd at last the mighty structure with the ground.

This Lewis knew
The tyrant of the western world!
And call'd the muses round the monarch's throne;
Hence Boileau sings
His conquests in sublimest verse,
And palliates all his crimes:
Hence, o'er his grave a thousand writers mourn,
And, with joint labour, raise
A noble column to his fame:
Deep in the earth 'tis founded strong,
Its summit props the skies,
Nor shall the rage of men, or strength of time
E'er shake its solid base, or triumph in its fall.

Neglecting this, disdaining arts,
And science, William, great in arms,
And martial virtue, first, and chief
Of Norman blood, that rul'd Britannia's realms,
Great William is obscur'd with age,
His glory buried like his dust
And with contempt we trample on his grave:
His deeds of violence, and war remain
To blast his memory,
And infamy alone's th' attendant on his name.

Not only can the Muse
Supply the falling arch, the bust
Decay'd, the raz'd inscription, and the tomb
In ruins heap'd;
But hails the virtuous Prince
Thro' ev'ry scene of life;
Persues him still thro' peace and war,
Thro' pleasure and fatigue;
Paints him still lovely, and endears his tribes
With the delightful strain:
Thus all his deeds
Become the wonder of mankind,
His form their idol, and his life
His happiness, and joy, their everlasting wish.

At home, the Husband, Father, dear,
Enchanting names, by turns, delight his fond,
Admiring heart, and chear
His private hours; the Muse attends,
Copies the lovely scene, his Consort's, charms,
Her spousal virtue, her maternal care,
Her prudence, duty, love,
And all the various ornaments
Of CAROLINA'S soul
Exalt the verse
With lov'd ideas of dometick joys;
And, like a mirror, faithful, just, and true,
Reflects the beauteous image to the world:
The beauteous image strikes the gazer's eye
With raptures pure, refin'd,
And each succeeding glance redoubles his delight.

The lovely train,
The dearest pledges of their mutual joys!
Would all appear with ev'ry grace,
With ev'ry charm adorn'd,
The hope the transport of adoring realms!
A prince, like FRED'RICK, in the pride of youth,
And manly beauty, gallant, brave, and wise,
In kingly virtues, and heroick worth
Supreamly eminent,
Would stand the foremost in the peoples view,
And fire their hearts
With reverential love.
See!  with impatience to the wide sea-shore
They croud, and long to ken
His Navy whit'ning o'er the deep,
And bounding o'er the surge to the expecting strand.

Next ANNA'S grandeur, elevated mien
Denoting regal birth,
Demanding regal sway,
Should awe them to profound respect,
And claim the honour due to such a soul,
To such superior charms.
AMELIA then,
The lovely, soft, and fair, whose angel look,
Whose sweet, engaging smiles,
Whose tender heart
Compassionate, benign, still fond to aid
The good distress'd, and give th' afflicted ease;
Whose ev'ry grace
Dispences joy around, AMELIA then
Would fire the sacred song,
And, with attractions numberless, receive unfeign'd applause.

Young CHARLOTTE like
A goddess blooming in the prime of youth,
Imbibing all the virtues of her race,
Young CHARLOTTE next
Would bless the Muses toil with all
The lov'd perfections of the female soul,
And sighing monarchs idolize the strain.
WILLIAM the nations other hope, the dear,
The charming object of a thousand prayers,
A thousand raptures breath'd to heav'n,
To bless his youthful days,
Inspire his little heart
To pant for virtue, and grow fond of fame,
Ev'n he, and ev'ry younger branch that decks
The royal house,
Should be the theme of verse,
And ev'ry joyful Muse run riot to their praise.

Thus Greenwich dome, stupendous pile!
Well worthy Albion, and her naval sons,
Where WILLIAM'S triumphs, MARY'S charms,
Great ANNA'S deeds, dread GEORGE'S toils,
AUGUSTUS' majesty
And CAROLINA'S form adorn
The breathing walls,
And animate the roof;
Thus Greenwich dome contains the heav'nly race
And Thrornhill's master-hand perpetuates ev'ry charm.

Again, when Peace
Enjoys her downy rule, and trade,
And plenty bless Britannia's isle,
Should her lov'd Monarch deign t' unbend his mind,
Fatigu'd with royalty, and tir'd with state,
To court a scene of pleasure, and relieve
His cares with merriment, and joy;
The Muse should wait on his command, attune
His revelry, improve his mirth,
Scatter a show'r of roses on his head,
Sing down the summer's sun
Unheeded to the main,
And brighten all the social virtues of his heart.

So, when AUGUSTUS from the noise of Rome
Retir'd, and, sunk in negligence and ease,
Beneath brown shades, by falling streams,
Refresh'd with cooling breezes, crown'd with flow'rs,
Enjoy'd the tem'rate eve,
Horace, with graceful voice, and warbling lyre,
Acclaim'd the golden hour, and hail'd
Th' incrasing joy:
The Nymphs, the Satyrs, of the woodland world,
Came list'ning to the song, and breath'd
Like Echoes ev'ry strain anew;
The gods of love, and wine,
Presided o'er the feast,
And, as the flowing boul went round,
Laughter, and musick, song, and jest
Frolick'd in ev'ry mind, and play'd round ev'ry heart.

When the glad huntsman winds
His cheerful horn, and wakes the morning star;
When the proud courser, and impatient hound
Demand the dusty toil,
The HERO mounts his neighing steed,
The muse pursues him o'er the dewy lawn,
Thro' umber'd shades, and down the bending cliff,
Keeps the warm chace in view, o'erlooks
The shouting hunters, opening hounds,
And hears the hills rebellow to the noise;
Describes the lab'ring KING,
Where eager, hot,
Impetuous, fierce, he gives up all the rein,
And spurs his courser o'er the dang'rous brook,
The thorny hedge, regardless of th' event,
And pants, and sweats, and toils, along the trembling green.

From hence, should war's dire ills
Alarm him to the field,
And violated leagues demand his sword,
The muse still anxious for his life and fame,
Should wait him to the bloody scene,
Record his martial deeds,
His prudent toils, and all
The wond'rous labours of the long campaign:
Where in the thickest fight, the utmost rage
Of arms, while noise, and death, and horror reign'd
Around, the faithful song should celebrate
The champion of his country's cause,
Serene amidst
A thousand hostile swords, amidst
A thousand dangers eminently great;
Should invocate from heav'n
Its guardian pow'rs,
To save his valuable life, and, round
His sacred head, extend their adamantine shields.

So, when at Audenarde the youthful Prince,
In love with glory and disdaining life,
Let up his squadrons in the face of death,
And dar'd the utmost horrors of the day,
His Country's genius tur'd aside
Th' intended fate, secur'd his charge,
Thro' all the fury of the war,
And to his sire restor'd him crown'd
With lawrels, and secur'd of fame:
Admiring nations wonder'd at the tale,
And rival princes fear'd to emulate his deeds.

Nor in the field alone,
But when, returning from the din of war
Victorious, o'er the roaring main,
His fleets should bear the conq'ror home,
On ev'ry mast, at ev'ry stern
An angel should descend,
To guide him safely o'er the dang'rous deep,
Correct the billows, mitigate the tales,
And steer the Navy to th' expecting shores,
Where joyful nations should receive their King
With blessings, and applause;
Should hail his arms
Successful o'er their foes,
And, on their knees
Confess the providential care; that sav'd
Him from the rage of arms, and sent him home in peace.

Behold!  whole nations croud to gaze
On their Deliverer,
Wait on his car,
And welcome with continual shouts their lord,
Their Heroe, to his longing realms.
See, wide o'er all the plains, they stretch along,
And a huge throng of heads,
At once, with adoration deep,
Bows low;
While peers, and princes, prostrate at his feet,
Present the mystick emblems of their pow'r,
And, with sincerest heart, applaud the monarch's toil.

So, as old fables sing,
Imperial Jove, in triumph rode,
Thro' all the vast of heaven,
When victory had crown'd his juster cause,
And all his giant foes were hurl'd,
With light'ning darts transfix'd,
Down to the dreadful gloom,
And hideous tortures of stern Pluto's reign:
So all th' inferior gods
Confess'd his pow'r supream,
And, crouding round the thund'rer, sung
Th' eternal trophies of his all-subduing arms.

Again, 'tis peace;
And plenty, commerce, happiness attend
The smiling hours; again the PRINCE
Deserves the muses song,
And other virtues claim their due renown.
He mounts the throne, and, like
Th' Omnipotent, attempers mercy, love,
Compassion, with the sword:
The subject speaks,
And strait his woes are eas'd; no more the great
Are titled to oppress;
No more the poor of want,
And misery complain; no more
Injustice lords it wide,
And orphans mourn their desolated state;
But ev'ry deed is virtuous, ev'ry deed is wise.

With joy the hoary servant sees
His age rever'd,
The constant friend his faithfulness confess'd,
Religion's sons, religion's name ador'd:
The sister arts,
Encourag'd in their toil,
With gratitude, with pleasure own
The source of their success,
And celebrate, with mutual aid, their patron's name.

Thus lov'd,
Thus honour'd, giving, and receiving joy,
Age, with unheeded step, should, slow, advance,
And, o'er the monarch's sacred temple, shed
His wint'ry snow;
His fatal dart,
And, crown'd with glory, warn him to the grave:
Yet, to the latest gasp, the Muse attends
Her Heroe, with sincere,
Lamentings, warbles o'er his fun'ral bed,
And, with her sweetest musick, fondly chears
His parting soul;
'Till, from its weeping friends,
It rises glorious to its native heav'n,
And harmony,
Too fine for mortal ear, acclaims the royal ghost.

Mean-time below,
While mourning Princes pay their last devoirs
To the lov'd ashes of so great a name;
While statues, trophies, monumental piles,
And long inscriptions speak
His just applause,
The sorr'wing muse, with never-ceasing grief,
Bewails her loss,
And, in immortal verse, prolongs
At once his virtue, and his fame;
Thus both shall live for ever blooming, fresh,
And fair, when monumental ornaments
Decay, and hungry Time,
With iron tooth, has eat
The long inscription from the stone:
Yet shall his sacred tomb thro' ages last
Uninjur'd by his rage;
For, o'er his urn,
A guard of Angels shall extend their wings,
And watch the holy ground,
To solitude, and silence consecrate
The frame, and tend the never-dying lamps around.

Such songs as these, illustrious Prince!
Shall be the Muses joy,
If you but deign to listen to their lays,
And, with a gracious condescension, bless
Their fav'rite sons.
O that your goodness may forgive
Th' ambitious verse, that antedates
Your deeds, and dares t' erect your tomb,
While yet you live
The guardian of mankind,
The hope of virtue, and the theme of fame.
Forgive, great KING!  so bold a flight,
Since justice, duty, love, inspir'd the strain,
And scarce a world should bribe her to indulge
A flatt'ring song,
Or stoop to hail the Monarch who unjustly reigns.
