Each Shepherd do pity a swain,
Oppress'd with sad sorrow and care;
I'll tell you what makes me complain,
I'll tell you what makes me despair;
'Tis Love that occasions my grief,
False Laura my heart has deceiv'd;
I'll tell you 'twill give me relief,
Tho' I'm sure it will scarce be believ'd.

Ye nymphs too who trip the gay Plains,
With them here your footsteps direct;
Tho' jocund I once tun'd my strains,
Such lays you must now not expect.
No, pensive I all the day long,
Lay reclin'd underneath the cool shade;
And this is my sad plaintive song,
How I was by Laura betray'd.

You knew her, how sweetly she shone,
'Mong all the fair nymphs of the Green,
I vow I don't think there was one,
Of so lovely, engaging a mien.
Her eyes like the stars were as bright,
Her lips like the soft damask Rose;
When I gaz'd, I was lost in delight,
But alas!  hence I date all my woes.

'Twas first at our sheep-shearing feast,
I chanc'd the dear charmer to meet;
Each Shepherdess blithely I kist,
But thought none as my Laura so sweet,
She sung!  What a ravishing Voice!
No Lark with her notes cou'd compare;
She smil'd, O how did I rejoice,
To find her so kind and so fair.

I whisper'd a tale in her ear,
Expressing how much I did love;
She told me I need not despair,
She did not my passion disprove.
Tho' few were my flocks on the mead,
She Riches not valu'd a rush;
For Constancy, Wealth did exceed,
And she own'd a like flame with a blush.

I cull'd ev'ry flow'ret so fair,
The Lilly, the Pink, and the Rose;
I ransack'd my garden with care,
A garland to form for her brows.
With smiles she my gift did receive,
Then begg'd I some present would take;
From her breast she a nosegay did give,
Which she bid me to wear for her sake.

Then, then I was happy indeed,
I scarce cou'd my transports contain;
I chear'd with my pipe the gay mead,
And we danc'd ev'ry night on the plain.
Of Hymen I ventur'd to speak,
And begg'd he might join both our hands;
She promis'd in less than a week,
She wou'd willingly wear his soft bands.

I thought!  What a simple fond youth,
I thought all my troubles then past;
Since Laura considered my truth,
And consented to crown it at last.
For who cou'd imagine that breast,
Cou'd harbour such cruel deceit;
Or think her of falsehood possest,
Who seem'd with each virtue replete.

But alas!  I have found to my cost,
That he who a fair one does trust;
Will find they deceive us the most,
When we least suspect them unjust.
Young Dorus, a wealthy young Swain,
The fickle one chanced to see;
He courted, &mdash; she did not disdain
His passion, &mdash; but quite forgot me.

When I thought the wish'd minute so near,
When ev'ry fond wish wou'd be crown'd;
Ah me!  what a tale did I hear,
So sad, yet too true, I soon found.
Yes, Dorus and Laura were wed,
And I was forever forgot;
O how did I wish myself dead,
O how did I curse my hard lot.

For Wealth she my passion did slight,
For Dorus of Wealth was possest;
I thought, but I did not think right,
That av'rice ne'er dwelt in her breast.
His Flocks were more num'rous than mine,
His Harvest did mine far exceed;
In nought else, he me cou'd outshine,
In the Dance, or the Pipe, or the Reed.

But let me forget the false Fair,
She does not deserve my fond love;
She will not be long free form care,
But soon this sad truth surely prove.
For ever a stranger to peace,
Her Riches her torment will be;
Her troubles still daily increase,
For her falsehood, her treach'ry to me.
