It chanc'd, as through this worlde's wilderness,
A palmer poor, I took my weary way,
Into a lonely den inforc'd to pass,
Adown to slumber there myself I lay;
And lo!  a dream I dreamed on that day:
I dreamed, and behold, a wight forlorn,
Whose face was turned from his house away,
Stood woful sad, his cloathing foul and torn;
His hand a book, his back a burden hath upborne.

I looked long, and saw him ope that book,
And saw him read therein right wistfully;
And ever and anon, with uplift look,
He smote his breast, and trembling sore did sigh:
While many a tear ran trickling from his eye.
His grief no longer able to contain,
At length brake forth this lamentable cry:
"What shall I do &mdash; salvation to obtain?
Ah, what to save my soul from death's eternal pain!"

In this sad plight, nought hoping for relief,
Homeward he fares with painful steps and slow;
And inward long concealeth all his grief,
That his dear wife and children might not know;
But inward kept, more troublous doth it grow.
And, as the torrent, stopt by mighty mound,
Doth swell the more, and all it's banks o'erflow;
So swells his trouble stemm'd, beyond all bound,
Till thus a vent at length reluctantly it found.

"Wife of my bosom, and ye christian dear,
Alas, for me, &mdash; for I am quite undone!
Upon me lies a load, which none can bear,
A load, god wot, I can nor bear nor shun.
And more from certain sage advice I've known,
That this our city perish must in flame!
And in destruction dire from heav'n o'erthrown,
We all shall be involved in the same,
Some way to 'scape not found, yet find I none to name."

Amazed sore, nought crediting his tale,
They deem'd it all a phrenzy of the brain:
And hoping sleep to sooth him might avail:
Sleep they advise, but their advice is vain.
Night adds to thought, and thought augments his pain:
And now they reason, now revile and chide;
Till from their converse forced to refrain,
Musing alone he chooseth to abide.
Now dwells in closet sad, now roves the fields full wide.

It chanc'd, as once he rang'd the fields along,
And read, and pray'd, and wept in mind distract:
Sighs heav'd his heart, and ever that sad song,
"What shall I do?"  his mournful voice exprest:
Each way exploring, ignorant of the best,
Willing to run, not knowing where to go:
A venerable man, (Evangelist
Men do him call) came there with footing slow,
"And whence this grief, quoth he, my son, declare thy woe."

"Hence, hence, I learn, oh Sire!  doth he reply,
And then he pointeth to the book in hand:
That I, alas, condemned am to die,
And at God's judgment after that to stand,
Yet loath am I to leave this earthly strand,
And all unable the high judge to meet!"
"But, wherefore, loath to quit this mortal land,
Said sage Evangelist, where human feet
Wander so long in quest, yet find so little sweet?"

"Ah!  not for that, (quoth Christian, so him call)
But, that I dread, this burden, which I bear,
Will cause me lower than the grave to fall,
And sink me down to Tophet's prison drear:
My future hap thus wakes my present fear!"
E.  "If such thy case, why dost thou then delay?"
C. "Because, alas!  to go I know not where."
"Then, said Evangelist, this roll will say;
Read, and yon wicket-gate, at distance, well survey."

"No wicket gate, quoth he, do I descry,
But hence far off discern a shining light:"
"Keep that, replied Evangelist, in eye,
And to the wicket-gate 'twill bring you right,
At which when thou shalt knock, upon thy sight
The way, thou hast to go, will open clear,
And all thou hast to do, be told thee quite."
He said:  and Christian no delay can bear;
So forward on his way he doth him quickly fare.
