BEZA.
Peace be to thee, my friend!  what art can move,
Or stop thy progress in the paths of love?
What makes thy youthful spirit run so low,
Or thy vibrating pulse so quick to flow?

ABDABRAHMAN.
Save thee! &mdash; I suffer through an inward pain&mdash;
The fair AYESHA loves no more her swain;
No more flow favours from her am'rous eye,
Yet, taught to feign, she smiles when I am by.

BEZA.
I'm mute with wonder till I hear the tale,
For sorrow's fears o'er fortitude prevail.

ABDABRAHMAN.
Oh!  I could form a cascade with a tear
For that fair girl, the blossom of the year!
The beauties of the mind to her give place,
The Persian statue fires not with that grace;
Her tresses form a treasure there alone,
And shine like meteors in the torrid zone;
Her voice is music, and her form divine,
And brightest Queen above the Lyric Nine.

BEZA.
Shew me the cause, and I'll remove the pain;
I'm wounded with thee, an unhappy swain.

ABDABRAHMAN.
She to the south is gone, to greet that man,
Her artful captive, and his pride to fan;
And though in wealth I am not bound to please,
The fair in form I can, in native ease;
With mercenary views her promise broke,
Nor fear no prospect of a female yoke.
I call forth curses on her from above,
And dread no misery but that of love.

BEZA.
Oh!  how I joy to find that I'm alone
My fair one's wishes, and her heart my throne.

JAFFIER.
Painful it is to tell, but yet I grieve&mdash;
She's gone! &mdash; and thou the same. &mdash; Yet this believe,
Their arts, their charms, in concert now I find,
To follow fortune, lunatic and blind.

BEZA.
Hush, all ye winds!  for vain is fruitless rage;
Allaying calms my throbbing heart assuage.
I look regardless on my former woes,
And find my blessings prove to be my foes:
Farewel, vain love!  to love no more aspire,
The fibres of my heart have felt its fire.
Pure happiness, I find, is not of love,
I scorn the world, and look for that above.

ABDABRAHMAN.
Now that I see, with thee, the rise and fall
Of our vain hopes, we wait another call.
No guile or snare, behold, in yonder sky
The fair one dwells, the Seraph of mine eye:
There doth she reign!  a conquest I have made,
Her empire's mine, I rest beneath her shade!
How bright the pleasing fancy forms the fair,
Grace, Beauty, Joy, and Virtue mark her air!
