Ye sons of India's ravag'd shore
The blest intelligence receive,
No longer let your sighs deplore,
Your hearts with pungent sorrow grieve;
For God hath heard the fervent pray'r,
Of thousands sinking in despair;
From his high throne vouchsaf'd to bend,
His arm with pow'r omnipotent extend,
To raise in Britain's isle a sympathizing friend!

Recoil not at her guilty name,
Altho' her sons with giant stride,
(Subversive of their ancient fame)
Oppress'd your country far and wide:
Her banish'd rectitude returns;
Indignant views Corruption's brood,
Preying like vultures on the wealthy food,
O'er India's groaning waste infernally pursu'd!

"Go!" said the God of Truth and Love,
(To angels happy to obey)
"This mandate from the realms above
Unto a mortal ear convey;
The Pow'r who spread the vaulted sky
Hath heard his children's piercing cry;
The captive's melancholy groan,
To his impartial register hath flown,
Who gives the friendless aid, and makes their cause his own!

"'Tis his compassionate design,
In Britain's senate you proclaim
His will in eloquence divine,
Denounce the vengeance of his name,
Prepar'd to crush the venal land,
Whose sons exterminating hand,
Regardless of a people's pray'r,
Nor sex, nor youth, nor feeble age could spare,
But fill'd with horrid screams the dark and troubled air!

"Unless fair Justice re-assume
Her awful, but dismantled throne,
Drag each oppressor to his doom,
And make his dire example known;
That man may view with just disdain,
Each type of sanguinary Cain,
(Satan's accurs'd, malignant slave,
In vilest actions eminently brave)
Crawl, like a wounded snake, detested to his grave!

"Ah!  who is he?" (amaz'd you cry)
That pleads with energy our cause,
And comes, commission'd from on high,
To rouze the violated laws?
Does there exist, on Britain's shore,
An heart so human to deplore!
Our countless injuries to speak,
By Heaven's command for retribution seek,
And wipe the clotted tear from Sorrow's furrow'd cheek?"

'Tis BURKE!  whose philanthropick soul,
By no deceitful view confin'd,
Extends her flight from pole to pole,
With Howard to relieve mankind!
Like the Samaritan, his breast
Pants to deliver the distrest!
Like his, at bleeding misery's call,
Sustains the wounded trav'ller in his fall,
Whom fell barbarians stabb'd, and plunder'd of his all!

Wherever Want and Sickness dwell,
Or Virtue 'neath Oppression pines,
He seeks unknown the wretched cell,
To every tale his ear inclines!
At each distress his heart o'erflows,
His voice consoles, his hand bestows;
Unequall'd on the scroll of Time,
No partial feelings guide his soul sublime;
A friend in every age &mdash; a Burke in every clime!

In vain Corruption's shrinking tribe
With gold his conscience would betray,
Indignant he beholds the bribe,
And spurns the venal dirt away!
Like Paul, when fast the viper clung,
And on his holy body hung,
He casts the serpent to the ground;
His virtue shields him from its deadly wound,
While earth beholds with awe, and Heav'n his deeds resound!

What Muse can celebrate his fame,
When pleading India's hapless cause?
Enraptur'd senates caught the flame;
They felt, and shouted with applause.
E'en stern Oppression drop'd a tear,
The dreadful catalogue to hear;
While pale Corruption speechless shook,
(By every friend of rectitude forsook)
Despair in all her steps, and horror in her look!

Immortal BURKE!  thy worth supreme
On ages yet unborn, shall shine;
And, like Apollo's heav'nly beam,
Expand its influence divine!
And, in that dread, terrifick hour,
When Death displays his awful pow'r;
Like blest Elijah thou shalt rise,
With glory crown'd, ascend the vaulted skies,
Where Justice sits enthron'd, and virtue never dies!

Nor he alone with awful voice
For justice on the culprit calls:
Another aids (ye poor rejoice!)
Whose name the guilty wretch appals!
'Tis SHERIDAN!  whose diction bold
(Like fam'd Demosthenes' of old)
Strikes terror on Oppression's crew,
Drags each aggressor to impartial view,
And gives that fiend accurs'd, th' extortioner, his due!

What transport in the bosom glows
Whene'er his magick voice is heard!
Sublimely strong his rhet'rick flows,
Conviction dwells on every word!
'Tis his, like musick, to asswage,
And calm the bosom's bursting rage;
When Orpheus his song began,
The savage beasts in dumb amazement ran;
So SHERIDAN transforms and softens savage man!

Yet more the humble Muse cou'd name,
Whose virtue shall for ever bloom,
Recorded on the scroll of Fame,
That mocks the terrors of the tomb;
Whose deeds, on that tremendous day,
When sun and moon dissolve away;
When earthquakes rend from pole to pole,
When lightnings flash, avenging thunders roll,
And Guilt, Shame, Horror, lacerate the soul.

Shall gain them this transporting sound:
"Enter, ye just, to those abodes,
Where life eternal's only found,
Nor care the tranquil mind corrodes!"
What forms are those, who, in despair,
With shrieks, that echo thro' the air,
From place to place imploring fly,
Distraction flashing from their hollow eye,
While Heav'ns paternal ear seems deafen'd to the cry?

India's oppressors!  hark!  that groan
Proclaims each monster's spirit fled;
No friend their sorrow to bemoan,
No grave to hide their guilty head!
Behold!  the grizzly fiends appear,
And vengeance thunders in the air;
In livid flame they hiss around,
Uplift their bodies from the frighted ground,
Flap their infernal wings, and sink in depth profound!
