High where bright Phoebus rears his lamp of day,
O'er cloud-cap'd hills enrob'd in smiling green,
Whose shade, impervious to the noon-tide ray,
Inspires mild transports suited to the scene,
And the calm Fancy teems with thoughts serene,&mdash;
Where tow'ring Gomiers pearly streams distil,
Which fab'lous Bards of old had made to flow
From hapless Nymphs, enclos'd against their will,
Doom'd in eternal silence, thus to vent their woe,
Silence &mdash; a hapless lot, for luckless Nymph I trow!

Thither on Fancy's sportive pinion bore,
Beneath a spreading Cheteignier I stood;
An awful cliff the spot enshadow'd o'er,
And deep below harsh roll'd the winding flood:
(Retreat propitious for poetic mood)
When lo!  before me a bright form appear'd,
Such (for a female 'twas) as Jove had sir'd
With flame as ardent, as was that I've heard,
Which Venus once of old, the God inspir'd:
And had the God been bless'd, Jove had again desir'd.

A purple vest was o'er her shoulder cast,
Which loosely flowing, wanton'd in the wind;
A sash of green enclasp'd her slender waist,
And graceful fell in careless ease behind,
And in her face sat ease, and dignity combin'd.
In her right hand, the luscious plant she bore,
Whilst sportive Zephyrs wanton'd o'er its blade;
And in her breast the crimson berries wore,
Alike the gen'rous staple of our trade,
And cooling banquet in the noon-tide shade.

Why haunts yon Bard, this sylvan rude retreat,
"Where silent, pensive, Melancholy reigns?
Go seek those scenes, where Joy exalts her seat,
A nobler theme demands the Poet's strains,
Than can inspire our mountains, rocks, and plains:
Yon bark, which through proud Oceans cuts her way,
A Royal youth bears to thy gladsome coast&mdash;
A son to Britain's Monarch, whose mild sway
A people gen'rous, free, and valiant boast,
Whose fame strikes terror to each hostile host.

"Who from the lap of apathy and ease,
From Lux'ry, and that fiend Refinement flies,
From scenes which souls effeminate might please,
And in the manly race of glory plies.
O let me seize, (says he) the glorious prize!
Proceed, brave youth, the hero's palm to claim,
Which Britain's Naval sons so oft have won!
A future age shall hail PRINCE WILLIAM'S name,
When thro' life's bright career thy race is run,
And never-fading laurels grace thy setting sun.

"Vainly would Gaul o'er Ocean's ruffled wave,
In rival Majesty, the sceptre sway;
A HENRY shall his country's glory save,
And Gaul's affrighted squadrons shall give way,
And Britain's flag, its rival, still obey!
Thy fairer laurels ev'n great Hawke's shall shade,
Then Rodney's fame, more pure thy deeds await!
And France, more fall'n, Commanders shall upbraid,
Doom'd to a Conflans, a De Grasse's fate;
Whilst emulous Bards th' exulting tale relate.

"By thee our trade from hostile dangers freed,
Shall undisturb'd in plenteous channels flow;
Nor shall the deep-fraught Bark in future heed
Attack from overt, or from secret foe:
But safe to Europe's mart our toil-wrought produce go,
Whilst, by thy bright example fir'd,
Pleasures effeminate our Youth shall spurn;
With manly Virtue, Glory's flame inspir'd,
Each gen'rous breast shall with pure ardor burn,
And to the paths of Fame, their footsteps turn!

"Or should fair Freedom's cause for vengeance call,
And tyrant Despots wanton power extend;
Should pride-puff'd powers a peaceful state enthral,
A WILLIAM HENRY shall be found their friend,
And in the generous cause his service lend!
May, Land of Freedom, long to thee be known,
Those virtues, which in Courts so rarely shine;
Whose fost'ring beams adorn a George's Throne,
And sheds its influence thro' the Royal line!
Long may fair Freedom's birth-right still be thine!"

She said &mdash; and all the visionary scene,
By sportive Fancy rais'd, at once withdrew;
Thick o'er the strand the gazing crowds were seen,
And the bright flash from thund'ring cannons flew:
Fair Albion's future hope, meets th' enraptur'd view!
Affection sheds her genial influence round,
Such as can worth transcendent, only claim;
Whilst sportive Echo bears along the sound,
Fondly repeating WILLIAM HENRY'S name&mdash;
And gladden'd multitudes foretel his future fame.
