The wonted hour, which gives the rising day,
Hath slowly step'd o'er yon blue mountain high;
No ray of morn, the orient beams display,
To streak with bright'ning gold the star-deck'd sky.

Say, Muse, oh!  say, why thus the day new-born
Is sabled o'er with this impervious gloom;
Or why so of its genial lustre shorn,
No gleam askance the valley's fair illume.

No sound harmonious floats along the vale,
The birds, in mournful silence, bend the spray;
The willows o'er the weeping brooks bewail,
While pensive on their streams meand'ring stray.

But hark!  yon ravens wild ill-boding croak;
The hooting bird too, of the sapless tree;
The solemn stillness of the morn hath broke,
And sorrow's spread it's mantle o'er the lea.

What visual form or mission'd angel bright,
With golden pinions breaks the darkling lour,
Whose radiant plume displays effulgent light,
And hovers, dove-like, o'er yon Gothick tower.

'Tis sure some pure celestial form on high,
To wrest a spirit from this frail abode:
Hark!  hark!  'tis call'd, I hear the parting sigh!
A soul's enlarg'd, and soars unto his God.

Amazement dazzles on my trembling sight!
See!  see!  that fleeting ghost!  'tis Tubal's shade;
Swift gliding on, to meet yon cherub bright,
Whose graceful brows with heav'n sent peace array'd.

The wing'd angelic lends his aiding hand,
And clasps the pure immortal to his breast.
But, hark!  the heav'nly train, aetherial band,
With sounds mellifluous charms his soul to rest.

The beauteous form, lo shapes his radiant plume,
Sublimely wide, and soars with heav'nly grace;
His starry wings the distant skies illume,
And brightens all the universal space.

'Tis gone!  Attraction's sunk beneath it's sight!
And leads a spirit flutt'ring for his own,
Through realms of bliss, amid the sons of light,
O'er star-set pavements, to his Maker's throne.

Oh!  may he there such delectations prove,
As mercy, grace, and perfect good inspire;
Bless'd with a crown of heav'n's redeeming love,
And join in endless song the heav'nly choir.

But here dread sorrow's spread the mournful hue,
Each valley, hill, and grove is sabled o'er;
The villager's, in vain, their sport renew,
For Tubal's dead, and pastimes are no more.

How oft I've felt his sweetly chanted strains,
Beating their tuneful rapture in my ear,
'Till dire misfortune's burst its canker'd chains,
And Hope enliv'ning sprang from his council dear.

His bosom'd harp, divine Erata strung,
Then touch'd the note of each according wire;
The strains were sweet, the varied Muses sung,
And Tubal's breast, they made their fav'rite lyre.

For who, like him, could touch the lyrick strain,
And add new beauty to the morning's rise;
Or who, like him, could charm the starry train,
When Cynthia spangl'd out the midnight skies.

But soft!  I hear the sorrow striking knell,
With deadly sound it calls the kindred few,
To 'tend the sad hearse to the hallow'd cell,
Where death-rais'd mounds are clad in hoary hue.

Then here, ye minstrels of the humble vale,
In solemn dirge with me his loss deplore;
For woodland notes, alas!  no more avail,
For Tubal's dead, and rectitude's no more.

No marbl'd stone, or monumental bust,
Shall tell the future age his worth and fame;
Yet conscious truth reveres his humble dust,
And pity drops a tear at Tubal's name.

What boots this strange magnificence of sound;
This pompous mock at death among the great;
Time's mould'ring hand the regal piles confound,
And mingles all within the lap of fate.

Then rest thou ever dear and friendly shade,
Since greatness only is the chance of birth;
A King's no more, when in the tomb he's laid,
Than Tubal in this narrow spot of earth.

Yet from his dust, bless'd Peace, your olives rear,
And kindred doves shall there securely dwell,
While flow'rs, more sweet than grace the vernal year,
Shall fragrance breathe around his clay-built cell.

And there too shall the fair inspiring Nine
A yearly tribute to his ashes pay,
'Till wearied Time forbids the stars to shine,
And yon bright Sun grows pale and dies away.
