SCENE, A GROVE. &mdash; TIME, THE EVENING-TWILIGHT.

Near Hotmir's valley where with angry sweep,
The rippling Aras joins the CASPIAN deep;
On the cool time when eve her mantle spreads,
And the sweet moon a silver lustre sheds
Around TIRSIA, loveliest of the vale!
The virgins press'd, and begg'd a sister's tale.

TIRSIA.
Ye, who stand mute, and wonder at these tears;
And ye, who ask the story of my cares!
Whose friendly eyes have mark'd the way I stray'd,
And lose for me their splendours in this shade:
This joyless spot!  where youth consumes her prime,
And grief sits weeping on the wings of time,
Strikes hard a breast, where deep distresses tear,
And looks around, &mdash; yet sees no ARBIT near!
&mdash;Ha!  do ye start! &mdash; 'tis him indeed I mourn,
Whom ruffian seas to their recesses torn!

Thou ocean-rover!  thou, whose restless mind,
Rock'd in a hurricane, repose cou'dst find,
Why dard'st for ore thro' sultry tracks to roam,
Yet left, than ore more precious, peace at home!
&mdash;No gifted gem like thee shall TIRSIA prize!&mdash;
What jewel lust'red like my ARBIT'S eyes?
Those eyes a sleep hath clos'd, whose lengthen'd dreams,
Shall dim the sun, and weary out his beams!
Pillow'd, perchance, on some far coast unknown,
Light sea-foam hourly o'er his corse is thrown!
&mdash;Or rests his limbs in some low dripping cave?
For there these drops shall murmur on a wave.
&mdash;Or, dwells his spirit in some airy dale?
Thither these sighs shall wander in a gale!

Sweet past our nights, where yonder waters creep,
Bathing the strand that banks the trackless deep:
Contented looks that woo'd the moonlight's stay,
Fled at the fires, that ushered on the day.
O'er the divorce love saw his victims burn,
Till darkness gave his season sweet return.
Ah now!  no more the shade that edges light,
Shall chear a wretch's sad desponding sight!

Those lime-tree hills first brought him to my view,
That grove sequester'd heard his last adieu!
To those dear hills I cast my aching sight,
And still remembrance yields a short delight!
Along that grove a weary way I take,
And hours of long distraction o'er me break.
&mdash;Bend thou deserter from thy seat above,
And meet this incense of unalter'd love!&mdash;

Thus mourn'd the nymph, fond sorrow fram'd her song,
And pity gave a cadence to the throng!
