The downward sun to distant regions gone,
O'er half the globe his empire had resign'd,
And softly beaming from his silver throne,
The moon illum'd those realms he left behind.

'Twas stillness round &mdash; the trees forbore to move;
No leaf was seen to flutter in the gale;
No echo heard to wake the slumb'ring grove;
No murm'ring rill to fret along the vale.

When CHARLOTTE, starting from the midnight dream,
That WERTER'S dear remembrance had inspir'd,
Forth issu'd to indulge the pleasing theme,
And sadly pensive to the plains retir'd.

For now she fondly wish'd unseen to stray,
Unheard, the fate of WERTER to deplore;
Each haunt to visit, trace each devious way,
That WERTER, hapless WERTER, trac'd before.

Calm Solitude, Affliction's nurse, she sought,
And fled from Pleasure, from Endearmeant fled;
Estrang'd to joys domestic, less she thought
On ALBERT living, than on WERTER dead.

Vain ALBERT'S wishes, his endearments vain,
And ev'ry art affection had essay'd
To check her purpose, or her will restrain;
Her will by duty less than pity sway'd.

Disconsolate, amid the solemn scene,
The mourner mus'd, regardless of the train
Of sportive Elves that frolic on the green,
And nightly trip the unfrequented plain.

Sweet Sensibility, her guest the while,
Could to the cheerless landscape lend a charm,
The dreary path, the slow-pac'd hour beguile,
And of its sable horrors night disarm.

No visionary shape by fancy drest,
No thought akin to superstitious fear,
Nor image new was on her heart imprest,
But WERTER'S ever present, ever dear.

He only, he of happiness bereav'd
That heart, that gentle heart, now deem'd to woe;
For him the unaffected sigh is heav'd;
For him, the tear of pity bade to flow.

Nor ever throbb'd a bosom so sincere,
As then distended with a votive sigh;
Nor ever stream'd the tributary tear
From half so beauteous, half so bright an eye.

Ah!  what avail'd the bosom void of art,
Or beauteous eye's insinuating ray!
Since that but keener anguish did impart,
And this to scenes of sadness point the way.

Yet such the only scenes that now could please,
An undissembling votary of grief;
Through these she wander'd darkling, only these
Could soothe her pangs, and minister relief.

Nor ceas'd thy wand'rings, CHARLOTTE, till in view
Appear'd the shade where WERTER us'd to rove,
And haply strove his passion to subdue,
His hapless passion, ah!  but vainly strove.

Ye venerable elms, she sigh'd and said,
Here let me weep the heavy hours away,
And where ill-fated WERTER lonely stray'd,
For WERTER'S sake, let wretched CHARLOTTE stray.
