In Aram's plains, where fair Damascus stands,
And fragrant roses deck the yellow sands;
Where Chrysorrbeus rolls his golden tide,
And wafts refreshing gales on either side;
Lo!  there Libanus' lofty summit's seen,
In ether rais'd, clad in perpetual green;
Where lofty cedars proudly wave their heads,
And o'er the mountain's brow their brances spread.
Ye youths who wander in the sylvan grove,
Attend, and mark the mighty pow'r of love.

There skies serene their genial influence yield,
O'er fruitful vallies and each fragrant field;
There Turkish pomps in glitt'ring splendor rise,
And Mosque and Minaret in grandeur vies;
There the proud Crescent rears its horns on high,
And gilded domes swell on the ravish'd eye.
What tho' by faith Mahometan they're rais'd,
Allah!  omnipotent!  be ever prais'd!
Ye beauteous maidens who my verse approve,
Beward whilst listening to my tale of love.

The morn has fled, and Sol's refulgent ray
In length'ning shadows gradual stole away;&mdash;
When in the western hemisphere obscur'd,
The wanton zephyrs to the grove allur'd
Each Syrian maiden, who with passion fir'd
Sought the cool gale, and to the shade retir'd.
When lo!  the monarch's daughter sought the breeze,
And wander'd luckless mid the cypress trees.
Ye Persian maids, my fancies ne'er reprove:
Your clime, your manners, all are form'd for love!

Sadi, a Moor, an humble Syrian slave,
Hies to the stream his sooty limbs to lave;
What tho' a dingy cast o'erspreads his form,
Pure is his bosom, and his heart is warm.
As Sadi sought the lightly swelling wave,
The monarch's daughter saw, and lov'd the slave.
The Moorish youth she view'd with anxious eye,
Gaz'd on his dingy form, and heav'd a sigh.
Ah!  why the warmth of such a flame reprove,
Since every look she took increas'd her love?

Beneath a lofty cypress' spreading shade,
In rapt'rous pleasure, sat the royal maid;
Unseen, unheard, did all his beauties scan,
And view'd the Moor as nature made the man:
Saw his dark form dash in the liquid foam,
Rise on the wave, and on its bosom roam;
Sport on the surface, on its billows feud,
And sink at will within the circling flood.
Ye maids whose thoughts in fairy fancies move,
Beware, nor taste th' insidious sweets of love.

Lost in the fond delirium of love,
Beguil'd, the web of fancy sweet she wove;
And as the tawny youth sunk in the wave,
The maid insensibly became a slave.
Lo!  in his sports she passion did reveal,
As o'er her cheek the crimson hue did steal;
What tho' he dares the circling flood disdain?
He dives &mdash; perchance, he ne'er may rise again.
Ye Persian maidens, ne'er such fears reprove,
For all are timid who do truly love.

At length with wanton sports and gambols tir'd,
The Moor arose, and from the stream retir'd;
Around his waist the milk-white sash he bound,
And sought his turban on the sandy ground;
When lo!  the Persian maiden met his eye!
Fearful, he knew not, or to stop or fly;
Amaz'd he bent his knee, and rais'd his hand,
And humbly laid his head upon the sand.
Blush not, ye maidens, tho' your fancies rove:
Sweet are th' anticipated joys of love.

His timid nature but inflam'd the maid,
And thus in accents soft she sweetly said:
"Rise, gentle Moor!  there is no danger nigh,
Save the soft whisp'ring murmur of a sigh.
These milky pearls that on my breast I wear,
Shall deck the ringlets of thy sooty hair;
O'er thy dark shoulder I this shawl will throw,
And to the mountain top, my Moor, we'll go.
Ye maids, whose am'rous passions kindly move,
Know that the current's strong which flows from love.

"My father's splendid treasures lost to view,
My love, my Moor, I'll rifle all for you!
A casket rich in pearls and jewels rare,
The sultan's pride and most peculiar care,
I'll to thine arms at fading eve resign,
Be thou prepar'd, my Moor, and I am thine!
Ah!  start not, Sadi &mdash; think on all you'll lose&mdash;
Death is thy portion should'st thou me refuse!"
Ye maidens, check not in your hours of love
The modest blush, for 'twill your thoughts reprove.

The Moor embolden'd view'd the grateful shade,
And ev'ry tree with cautious eye survey'd;
Then bent him down, and in his tawny arms
Clasp'd the ripe maiden's fondly yielding charms;
"O!  Selima," he cried, "this lovely night,
Yon rising crescent's lustre'll aid our flight:
I'll to the Meidan at eve repair,
And for thy sake the Sultan's vengeance dare!"
The moon arose, and heav'nly dews were shed,
As o'er the sandy waste the lovers fled.
