When bellowing warfare lords it round,
And death and loud uproar abound,
When Gallia, wild ambitious foe,
Oh!  Britain aims thy overthrow;
When proud Iberia drains each mine,
Big with the same accurst design;
When Belgia's bold rapacious knaves
Have basely join'd th' aspiring slaves,
And foul rebellion, with averted eyes,
Rejects the offer'd terms, and all thy pow'r defies,

When thus with foes encircled round,
And not a friendly pow'r is found;
Is this a time, Oh Britons say,
On Pleasure's lap to die away?
Is this a time for long debate,
For narrow views, and factious heat?
Is this a time for calm repose,
When half the warring world are foes?
Oh!  Britons rouse to patriotic deeds,
For oh!  oppress'd with numbers, see your country bleeds.

Where is that glowing ardent zeal,
That spirit Britons wont to feel?
Where are your bold exertions gone,
And where the public virtue flown?
Heavens!  how alter'd, how supine,
How slow t' embrace each great design,
How worthless pride and coward fears,
Keep thin your corps of Volunteers;
But languish Britons, view to your disgrace,
What animation marks Hibernia's manly race.

When danger shew'd her frightful mien,
No impotent attempts were seen.
No frigid meeting stain'd their land,
They rose a bold, a patriot band:
No narrow views, no dastard fear,
No supercilious pride was there,
All ranks, all parties feel the flame,
And glow at Freedom's sacred name;
All, all self-arm'd and self-array'd appear,
And at the artist's side is seen the noble Peer.

'Twas thus they rose, and thus they stand,
The guardians of a rising land,
Disdaining ease, respected, fear'd,
And with a nation's plaudits cheer'd;
Oh!  that Britannia's sons would rise,
Like them intrepid, bold, and wise,
Like them deserve the patriot name,
And rise from apathy to flame&mdash;
Ambition soon wou'd give the contest o'er,
And soon wou'd meek-ey'd peace be wafted to our shore.

Tho' baleful anger spreads around,
Yet sparks of virtue still are found,
SUFFOLK, whose sons shall live in fame,
And thee, Oh!  LOWTHER, thee, whose name
Can never die, whose noble mind
High-soaring, tow'rs above thy kind.
Oh!  Britons, join this godlike man,
Swift, swift, adopt his patriotic plan,
Your country then may raise her awful form,
And with unequal fury hurl the warring storm.

Each envious state wou'd loath the sight,
And curse a flame so wond'rous bright;
Ambition, with desponding mien,
And nerveless arm would then be seen;
Despair wou'd sit on Treachery's face,
And Craft, dismay'd, would point at Peace;
Ingratitude wou'd drop her crest,
And fold a parent to her breast,
And Albion then invincible wou'd stand,
Ride o'er the boist'rous surge, or wave the olive wand.

Then Britons rouse, your strength combine,
And baffle every fell design:
Oh!  emulate your sires of old,
Whom pride or danger ne'er controul'd,
Rouse, and defend this spot of earth,
This sea-girt isle that gave you birth,
Let every arm prepare the blow;
Then, like a wounded lion robb'd of prey,
Wou'd Britain strike her foes with terror and dismay.
