Loud strike the Harp, and let the air resound,
Enraptur'd Echo shall return the sound.
Whether the strain is tun'd to love,
Or the wild warblings of the vocal grove;
Whether the soul is rous'd to arms,
Or meanly trembles under fear's alarms;
Whatever passions seize upon the soul,
They &mdash; to the Lyre must bend, sweet master of the whole.

Thus sung the Bard, on Snowdon's lofty head,
That frowns tremendous o'er the Ocean's bed.
Loose flow'd his robe, and waving with the wind
A wreath of oak around his temples twin'd,
His eyes reflected all the light of day,
His aged locks look'd venerably grey;
With bended attitude he mov'd along,
The Harp gave sweet accordance to the Song.

Ah!  where's the Cambrian minstrel gone?
That with honour whilom shone:
Seal'd are those eyes that beam'd so gay,
And time has swept the Lyre away.
Ah, cruel EDWARD!  tell me where
Is fled the soul thou would'st not spare?
Greatly, Monarch, might'st thou shine,
If Cambria's Bards, with touch divine,
Had nobly liv'd to praise thy name&mdash;
Not died &mdash; to injure EDWARD'S fame.
Ah!  what's the fame that crowns the modern Bard,
Behold, with drooping head, the sad reward.&mdash;

Behold yon Bard that musing moves along,
With soul all fervor, and an eye of fire;
With ev'ry virtue plaintive on his tongue,
And all the sweetness of th' Aonian choir.

See the mean garb that fruitless braves the wind,
And melancholy droops i' the face of Heav'n;
The last sad remnant misery could find,
By time worn thread-bare, and by tempests driv'n.

Is this a garb to glad yon helpless soul,
Warm'd only with its own specific glow:
Where energetic thoughts divinely roll,
And rouse to virtue with an overflow.

Lo where he treads, and piteous looks around,
And silent wonders at the vacant eye;
Thinks joy a vision, marks the humid ground,
And calls for Nature's privilege &mdash; to die.

Tir'd with neglect, and worn with Envy's hate,
A lonely traveller o'er the Public road;
With sighs expressive of his wretched fate,
He speeds his journey to his sad abode.

There want upbraids him with an anguish keen,
And sad rememb'rance wakes a tear of woe;
No friend to stand affliction's gulph between
To share his sorrows, or impeded their flow.

That eye that once was wont serene to shine,
And throw its beams to cheer the drooping heart,
Now joyless falls &mdash; for many a woe's conjoin'd,
To dim its lustre, and its rays to part.

No more the heavenly Muse can raise a smile,
Or with the minstrel thrill thro' every pore;
The fields of fiction now no more beguile,
E'en Genius' self can flatter him no more.

The lovely partner of his aching breast,
She who had once the hopes of better days;
In opening life by Fortune's hand carress'd,
Alive to virtue, and awake to praise.

The meek companion of her husband's woe,
To Heav'n and him, alternate turns her eyes;
Obtruding pity stops the tears that flow,
But Heav'n accepts the offering of sighs.

One beauteous infant at her breast she bore,
That smil'd unconscious of its hapless state;
Heir to existence, it would claim no more,
Save the sad heirloom of their wretched fate.

On yonder place, which once was call'd a bed,
Uncover'd from the ruthless winds that blew;
Another child in mis'ry's rags was laid,
But sleep, in pity, life's sweet curtain drew.

No former vestage of superior life,
No worn-out grandeur caught the gazing eye;
No great and little caus'd alternate strife,
Congenial all, for all was misery.
