What tho' no marble here, with polish'd pride,
Proclaims some god-like hero's hapless end,
Who liv'd rever'd, was pitied when he died,
Of worth the stay, of innocence the friend?

Beneath these humble grassy turfs may lie,
More sacred dust than splendid tombs contain,
Whose spirits rise to purest bliss on high,
Which pompous epitaphs demand in vain.

The truly good require no marble's aid,
No gilded characters to mark their fame,
Their virtues smile at death's oblivious shade,
For future ages still their virtues name.

Ah!  what avails it to the guilty great,
That flatterers their monuments adorn?
Say not, false marble, all deplore their fate,
When all their fleeting honors view with scorn.

Say not, beneath this marble is contain'd
A man who for his country nobly fell,
If guiltless blood his boasted laurels stain'd,
And widow's tears the tyrant's fury tell.

The blazing lightning and the howling blast,
Shall strip thee of thy varnish'd tale of woe;
Not e'en thy form, proud monument, shall last,
But with thy hero's ashes be laid low.

Where are the mighty conq'rors of the world,
At whose approach the trembling hosts grew pale,
Who at their foes resistless vengeance hurl'd
While loud was heard applause's thund'ring tale?

Thou, lowly grave, on which I now recline,
Lament not that they are not buried here;
No flatt'rers now would decorate their shrine,
Nor o'er their relicts drop a pitying tear.

Tho' docks and nettles now around thee spread,
If here an honest heart dissolves in clay,
Celestial dews shall Angels on thee shed,
And bless thy turf, when sculptur'd stones decay.

The painted flow'rs which grace the verdant plain,
And streams reflecting rays of silver light,
Now dusky clouds and gloomy shadows stain;
No smiling landscape decks the robe of night.

Thus beauty fades when death his awful veil
Around the virgin's blooming graces throws,
No more her charms the youth's fond heart assail,
But all his dreams of bliss are dash'd with woes.

Sad sighs the breeze along the waving grass,
I hear the wailings of a plaintive rill,
Can I my sympathetic tears suppress
At Clara's death, which now my eye-lids fill?

Sweet maid, cut off as falls a lovely rose,
Whose blushing leaves unfeeling tempests tear,
For thee my heart in floods of grief o'erflows;
On Anglia's plains no nymph appear'd more fair.

Ye mournful gales which now around me blow,
O waft my tears to Cleora's distant tomb;
And sure the hallow'd spot ye well may know,
For there the sweetest flow'rs of summer bloom.

Or rather let some Seraph's golden wing
The crystal drops to realms of bliss convey,
And leave them where unfading flow'rets spring,
To glitter on her garlands ever gay.

There, where she walks amidst etherial bow'rs,
If she the pensive hanging drops shall see,
At once she'll pluck the pity-bearing flow'rs,
And know their weeping pendants came from me.

No voice of joy invades this chearless ground,
But hollow rocks repeat the ocean's roar,
Of waves successive still I hear the sound,
Which swell, and burst, and die along the shore.

So generations rise and swiftly glide,
As rising waves the falling waves controul;
Then learn, ye noisy sons of tow'ring pride,
That soon your surgy hopes to peace must roll.

But see the rosy morn begins to dawn,
Before her smile the gloomy shadows fly,
Now chearful verdure brightens o'er the lawn,
And soon the golden sun shall glad the sky:

Bright emblem of that great, important day,
When Christ the Sun of Righteousness shall shine,
With living beams re-animate our clay,
And call the Faithful to his joys divine.
