"Ruin seize thee, luckless dance!
Confusion on thy mazes wait,
Tho' S&mdash;t and D&mdash;gl&mdash;s thro' thee prance,
They mock the French with idle state.
Puff'd cravat, nor short pig-tail,
Not all the Sp&mdash;c&mdash;rs shall avail
To save the upstart set's unfeeling ears
From TYSON'S curse, from TYSON'S tears!"
Such were the sounds, spoke for the footed pride
Of th' eldest M&mdash;k&mdash;m gone away,
As down the middle, thro' the side,
Long Sp&mdash;r kick'd his weary way,
L&mdash;d F&mdash;ld&mdash;g stood aghast in speechless trance;
To bed!  cried A&mdash;dre's Knight, and couch'd his airy sconce.

On a bench, with haughty brow,
Frowns old Tyson o'er the dancing brood,
Deck'd in the coat of gold and blue,
With haggard eyes the M. C. stood;
(Stiff his bag, and hoary hair
Frizz'd like a mop, aloft in scented air)
And with a Master's hand, that's seen afar,
He wav'd and call'd for La Tarare.
Hark, how the pipe and tabor, (instrument of war,)
Jigs to the dancing troop beneath!
Than thine, Oh King!  these rooms are better far,
With thee, there's hardly room to breathe.
Dancing's no more, since M&mdash;rk&mdash;m's gone away;
&mdash;Th' Archbishop's gone for the birth-day.

Still is Miss M&mdash;k&mdash;m's foot,
That kick'd the standers by:
&mdash;sleeps upon his drunken bed:
&mdash;Fiddlers ye play too high!
For D&mdash;tt&mdash;n's gone, whose magic cut
Made fair Miss G&mdash; droop her gauze-top'd head.
Dear lost companions of the dancing art,
Dear, as the rigadoon, or dos a dos,
Dear, as the steps I'd got by heart:
How could you, cruel, leave us so?
No more I'll stay! &mdash; the fiddlers play.
On yonder bench, a drowsy band,
I see them sit, they're scraping yet,
One strums away with his left hand:
Hark how in dreadful harmony they join!
Tho' some esteem it very fine.&mdash;

Clear the room and stand aloof,
To dance, and not to talk, is this the place;
Give ample room, and verge enough,
Signora Rossi's steps to trace.
Mark the hour, and mark the night,
When Avon shall re-echo with affright
Discordant strains, thro' Derham's roofs that ring,
Squeaks of an agonizing string!
Thou bore of Bath, with unrelenting face,
Thou tear'st the bowels (catgut) of thy bass.
W&mdash;t&mdash;rs, the connoisseur, with powder'd pate
Would faint. &mdash; What Suitors round old TYSON wait,
Peers' daughters in the van, with Knights combin'd,
And Sorrow's faded form plebeians shew behind.

Mighty D&mdash;tt&mdash;on's mighty cuts!
Lo!  on his couch his waistcoat lies!
The fur cut off.  "Oh damn my guts!
I'll never wear it more," he cries,
"Is my sable partner fled?
Thy daughter's gone:  O Y&mdash;k, she is indeed."
To Court, the day the Queen was born,
Gone, to salute the rising morn.
To make his bow, her father puffs and blows,
While proudly, in his cassock, band and wig,
In sable trim, the flogging prelate goes,
Age on his brow, but yet with expectation big,
For Canterbury's See shall this attendance pay,
When hush'd in grim repose old MORE has clos'd his day.

Fill high the sparkling bowl;
The rich repast prepare;
Blest with a card, you yet may share the feast,
Porter and negus scowl
A gracious smile upon the pamper'd guest.
Heard ye the din of catches bray,
Treble shrill and bass voice hoarse?
Long notes of rapture swell the jocund lay,
And thro' melodious Irish take their course.
Ye streams of Bladud, Bath's eternal fame,
Foul stomachs now to you'll be led,
Of midnight rakes, oh!  spare the shame,
And cure th' Hibernian's aching head.

But, oh!  what dames from benches height
Descending quick their glitt'ring skirts disclose?
Visions of glory, spare my aching sight,
Ye unmade steps, crowd not on my toes!
No more our cap'ring M&mdash;k&mdash;m we bewail,
All hail thou genuine dance, long minuet hail!

Girt with many a girdle (gold,)
Sublime their spangled fronts they rear;
And gorgeous dames, and dancers bold,
In frizzled majesty appear.
In the midst, a form divine
Does Britain's fairest fair outshine.
Her easy port, her love inspiring face,
Adorn'd with ev'ry virgin grace.&mdash;
What heav'nly shape!  what sweet bewitching air!
A thousand blooming loves around her play.
Hear, lovely P&mdash;w&mdash;s, hear a captive's pray'r!
Thou'dst animate a heart of coldest clay.
Bright rapture's call, and gazing from all parts,
Wave in your heav'nly eye your triumphs o'er our hearts.

The dance adorn again
Fierce D&mdash;lt&mdash;n, and his faithful Love;
And B&mdash;r&mdash;ws fair, by fairy Fashion drest,
In graceful measures move
Pale H&mdash;ll, and pleasing H&mdash;ne,
And Cr&mdash;bie, tyrant of my throbbing beast.

A voice, as of the Demon choir,
Gave warning now the hour drew near;
The merry strains now lessen on the ear.
And lost, in near approaching night expire.
"Fond dancing crowd, think you yon jocund strings,
Mov'd at your call, have hinder'd night to pass:
To-morrow we'll repair to Bladud's springs,
And warm our stomachs with redoubled glass."
Then says M. C.  "With joy I see
The different doom our fates assign,
They're in despair, to leave off there,
To rest at home is mine."&mdash;
He spoke and perch'd upon the benches height,
Held up his watch and roar'd &mdash; "'Tis past eleven &mdash; GOOD NIGHT."
