The sermon ended &mdash; to their humble meal
With sober steps the Villagers repair;
Strong appetite (the boon of health) they feel,
Nor think of preacher, prayer-book, or pray'r.

Humble the meal, yet crown'd with peace and joy,
Which oft are banish'd from the lordly board,
Where glutted wealth abounds alone to cloy,
And riot murders with deceitful sword.

Ah, short the period of sublunar bliss!
For bliss the brook-divided valley knows;
The rural song &mdash; the blaze &mdash; the stolen kiss&mdash;
And careless mirth, which down the table flows.

Hoarse ravens oft were heard with evil note,
The salt was spilt, the cream refus'd to come;
The yard-dog howling stood, with uplift throat,
With scorching drought the babbling spring was dumb.

Man blooms to-day, and spreads green boughs around,
Raising his glory to the garish sun;
To-morrow strikes his honours to the ground,
The curtain falls, and life's poor show is done.

On the dry roofs, embrown'd with many a show'r,
That faded soon the straw's primeval hue,
The wither'd hags exhaust their flaming pow'r,
The flames, as eagles on the quarries, flew.

Vain all the pomp!  the wild parade of man!
His house, his goods, his varieties of ease!
Eternal preparation for a span,
Chequer'd with losses, terrors, or disease;

Down plunge the rav'nous flames, and next
Burn the neat bowels of the reeking cot;
The Bible, where is doubled down the text;
Ah, doubled down, yet oft too soon forgot.

The pond'rous bedstead, and the coffer strong,
Of ancient carving, by some grandsire bought&mdash;
The wooden elbow-chair &mdash; the table long&mdash;
The painted pictures, of the pedlar bought.

The mantle stor'd with earthen dishes bright,
The rows of pewter polish'd all with care,
The brazen tripod, solace of each night,
By trusty matron fill'd with homely fare;

Melted in one black mass &mdash; each form of use,
Of simple ornament, is gone and lost;
Old Chaos triumphs, by stern Fate let loose;
And sever'd atoms in all ways are toss'd.

In what uncertain channels riches flow!
What ebbs of Fortune mark each rolling hour!
Her giddy wheel successive empires know,
That sink to dust beneath Oblivion's pow'r.

Happy the mould'ring clay, that quiet sleeps
Where yonder turf is lac'd with prickly thorn;
That eye which human woe no longer weeps;
That ear, unwounded with the world's proud scorn.

Yet kindred love shall melt the yielding heart,
The feeling soul on earth be sometimes found:
From the fill'd eye the briny tear shall start,
While gentle Pity binds the bleeding wound.
