Near a cool Spring, beneath a Date-tree's shade,
A youth detain'd a fair but scornful maid:
Peevish and coy, the struggling captive strove
To fly his courtship and despise his love.
In vain he caught &mdash; he press'd her hand in vain,
Her looks were anger, and her frowns disdain;
She scoff'd his fondness, and his suit denied,
Till thus he soften'd her obdurate pride.

ADELAN.
Nay, stay thee, FATIMA! &mdash; Oh, turn awhile,
And hear the faithful pleadings of my tongue;
Mine is no rhetoric rich and carv'd with guile&mdash;
Indeed I love too well to do thee wrong.

FATIMA.
Hence, hateful ADELAN, thou wary cheat!
When next I listen thy seductive tale,
The Hound shall kiss the fierce Hyena's feet,
The Pigeon o'er the Vulture's force prevail.

ADELAN.
Did but a Son of Man fling such reproach,
So vile, so slanderous, cruel, and unjust;
By hope of Paradise, my rage abroach,
This hand had laid him level in the dust!
But, FATIMA &mdash; Oh MAHOMET! &mdash; can it be?&mdash;
I little thought to hear such words from thee.

FATIMA.
Yes, vicious wretch! &mdash; What evil had I done
To force thee wantonly insult my fame?
Had I a purpos'd crime? &mdash; I know of none,
Unless my love for thee deserv'd that name.

ADELAN.
Paint but my wrongs, if wrongs I ever knew,
Tell me my faults, that I those faults may mend;
Else shall I fruitlessly a mist pursue,
And try to unravel doubts without an end.

FATIMA.
Why does the Culprit hang abash'd his head
When tax'd with sins his conscience can't deny?
Go ask thyself: &mdash; reflect with guilty dread,
And fearful of mankind to deserts fly.

ADELAN.
Now by the Moon I swear, no blush of shame
Spreads on my cheeks, nor does my conscience fear:
Why then does FATIMA delay to name
What dauntless ADELAN demands to hear?

FATIMA.
ITEGHE tells to every shepherd maid
That ADELAN loves FATIMA no more;
For, lately seeking a young lamb that stray'd
Along the spacious Caspian's flowery shore,
In a deep cave where ACCRA dries his nets,
He spied her lock'd in ACCRA'S fond embrace;
And now, if possible, those charms forgets
That in his heart once held the sovereign place.
This she reports as you yourself declar'd,
Who give to her those vows I some time shar'd.

ADELAN.
Will the faint Traveller, who treads the plain
To barter merchandise for glittering gold,
Wearied with toil, repose him in the den
Where the gaunt Lions their fell banquets hold?
Will Seamen set their sails when't storms abroad?
Will Misers credit Robbers with their wealth?
Will the wise Saphan trust the Lynx's fraud,
The sick use poisonous weeds to give them health?
Then how, dear FATIMA, couldst thou believe
A spiteful woman lesson'd to deceive?

FATIMA.
Knowing my thoughts as polish'd diamonds clear,
I vow I doubted, and did oft dispute;
Yet foul-mouth'd Malice still assail'd mine ear.&mdash;
&mdash;But didst thou never blacken my repute?

ADELAN.
Have I at any time presum'd to lead
Thy steps from modesty, thy mind from good?
Have I not told thee, Virtue towers indeed
Firm as the rock that scorns the Indian flood?
Have not mine actions been as pure as light,
Fond as the vine that curls about the palm;
Gentle as zephyrs in the train of night,
And like the morning chaste, though like it warm?
Then how should I defame that idol maid
Whose frowns I fear'd &mdash; whose mandates I obey'd?

FATIMA.
And did ITEGHE never win thy smile,
Nor hear thy love-suit pour'd in plaintive rhymes?
Has no soft dalliance fill'd a vacant while,
Her bosom never pillow'd thee at times?

ADELAN.
Never!  though often on the sunny lawn,
Beside my hut, or in the verdant shade,
At solemn eve, at noon, at reddening morn,
In wood or valley, I have met the maid:
The speech of courtesy made up the round
Of love or compliment I paid her pride.
Not so to thee, revolving hours have found
Thy Suitor like thy shadow at thy side.

FATIMA.
Sweet youth, 'tis verity! &mdash; how could I think
A moment's space misdeeds to thee belong?
But who that braves the billows may not sink?
Ah, who so virtuous that he ne'er did wrong?
Dear ADELAN, forgive me:  hence I'll prove
As unsuspicious as becomes thy love.

ADELAN.
Forgive! &mdash; oh tell me, didst thou once offend?
Or, if thou didst, thy penance shall be rare;
In one sweet kiss let all thine errors end&mdash;
Live, charming Girl, as blameless as thou art fair.
The Warrior's gladness at the trumpet's sound,
The Lover's tumult on the bridal night,
The Poet's pleasures when with laurels crown'd,
Ne'er reach'd the summit of such high delight
As my proud soul, since thou, divinely kind,
Hast chas'd the gloom that darken'd on my mind.

FATIMA.
Oh not to me the balsam's gum so dear,
The aloe's or cinnamon's perfume&mdash;
The sparkling diadems Sultanas wear,
The Tyrian vest from the embroidering loom&mdash;
The stores of frankincense, of gold and myrrh,
Which loaded camels journey with from far&mdash;
The silver chords to rapturous music strung,
As is the pleasant utterance of thy tongue.

ADELAN.
Henceforth let tigers with the herds repose,
Let crested adders lick the infant's hand;
Let thorny brambles bear the blushing rose,
And fruitful fig-trees clothe Arabia's sand;
Henceforth let jealousies and doubts remove,
And all mankind be link'd in endless love.
