Beneath the spiry rocks of Esk-Bagdat,
Beside the rapid Tigris SHADIR sat;
He sigh'd in secret for a Persian Maid,
And thus the pensive youth his love-sick soul betray'd:

Beat on, ye waves!  Ah, what avails your rage?
The rocks, unmov'd, frown on the war ye wage;
So to KALASSA all my prayers are vain&mdash;
More hard than rocks, she laughs at SHADIR'S pain.
Roll on, ye billows!  still tumultuous roll&mdash;
What is your heat to that which swells my soul?
Weep on, proud river, till thy source be dry,
My streaming tears can every spring supply;
While life remains, these bitter tears will flow,
A life, alas!  too long betroth'd to woe!
From SHADIR'S love the fair KALASSA flies,
Nor heeds his piteous plaints, nor hears his sighs.
What fury plagues me?  wherefore burns my brain?
If woman scorn him, SHADIR can disdain.
'Tis madness all! &mdash; for who, that lives to love,
Would curb his passion, or his sense reprove?
The holiest Mufti of the Prophet's shrine,
Whose words are MAHMUD'S, and whose acts divine,
Might change his Koran for hymeneal lays
To solemnize KALASSA'S rapturous praise.
Tell me, great orb of love, of life, of light,
That in thy hottest noon now burn'st so bright,
That fling'st, exultingly, a shower of beam
On thirsty cities, forest, plain, and stream&mdash;
Tell me, oh tell, if in thy course there be
A nymph so comely, or so fair as she?

My love is taller than the mountain pine,
More sweet her breath than cloves, her lips than wine;
Her fine blue eyes would dull the sapphire's blaze,
And when she bends the waving cedar plays.
Her curling tresses cheeks of bloom entwine,
So looks the rose beneath the shadowing vine;
Such ease attends her steps as Sultans love
When dancing nymphs in graceful circlets move;
And when she speaks, meseems the virgin's tongue
Pours forth the liquid language of the song.
But hence, fond SHADIR, nor exhaust thy tears,
Nor waste on scornful maids thy morn of years;
Hence to the War; there Glory waits, and Fame;
Preserve thy quiet, and forget her name.
As well the Dervise, in the desert hid,
Should rashly hope &mdash; dare he presume to bid&mdash;
The bois'trous Ganges turn aside his course,
The Nile's vast cataracts stop their tumbling force,
Rude Aboulsaken smile a flow'ry plain,
Or blood-like Arva draw a silvery train:
As well might false Apostates strive to bind
The voice of ALLA whispering in the wind,
In other spheres as well the planets move,
As SHADIR purpose to forget his love.
Ah, woe is me, to slander thus my race,
Pollute my blood, my royal stem disgrace;
Remov'd from thrones, and all the pomp of state,
Without a murmur sweat and labour on
Beneath the scorching of a sultry sun;
Fetch them the whip, or unsear'd stripes recount;
Trim the tall cypress, bid the lotus smile,
And, like a gard'ner, know the gard'ner's toil!
How chang'd, how fallen from the rank I bore,
PRIDE of the EAST! &mdash; and LORD of EARTHLY POWER!
Yet, did KALASSA recompense my love,
Whole moons of toil like pleasant dreams would move.
For her, and all those dear delights to share,
That mutual souls to bridal chambers bear;
To boast that bliss denied the proud and great,
Lov'd for myself alone, and not my state,
The silken sofa, and the feast I shun
For leaves and grapes unripen'd by the sun;
For, did she guess my birth, how soon her scorn
To servile smiles, to flattering looks would turn!

Ten thousand lances march before the car
That bears my father MULEY CAWN to war;
Ten hundred thousand subjects kiss the ground,
Where his bright wheels have roll'd their axels round;
Mercy and Power at either elbow ride&mdash;
To save or punish is alike his pride!
When homeward borne the mighty warrior comes,
Welcom'd by sprightly flutes and thundering drums,
A thousand damsels loosely rob'd advance,
Beat the loud timbrels, and lead up the dance.
Rests the Great King &mdash; a troop of rival maids,
From Aden's markets and Circassia's shades,
Bright as the Houris in the heaven of Love,
With wanton sport or playful silence move,
Swell their soft bosoms to repose his head,
And bless the pleasures of the nuptial bed.

To lull our sorrows, and our cares befriend,
For me, for mine, unnumber'd joys attend:
When the gay ensigns of the morn unfold
Their purple banners stream'd with refluent gold;
When up the East the eager Sun with grace
Comes laughing on, we saddle for the chase;
A thousand courses paw the indented plains,
Snuff the cool air, and shake their flowing mains;
With Parthian bows, and many a chosen sling,
And barbed darts that in their quivers ring,
With horns of ivory girdled at their side,
In Tyrian vests a thousand hunters ride:
Dogs, horses, elephants pursue the rout,
And woods and valleys echo to the shout.
The false Hyena feels the flying dart
Pierce her broad breast, and stab her savage heart;
The arm'd Rhinoceros meets the javelin's force,
And the bold Lion fastening on our horse:
The spotted Leopard's mark the victor's pride&mdash;
These, would KALASSA honour my embrace,
Herself, her couch's downy bed should grace:
These sports, this wealth, these luxuries are mine;
But these and more &mdash; my hand, my heart are thine.

Or does KALASSA yet prefer the grove,
Her SHADIR'S gardens shall salute his Love;
For her alone the damask rose shall blow,
For her alone the paly lime shall grow;
The paly lime now bends the shading tree
To offer fragrance, fruit, and shade to thee;
To juicy orange and delicious pine,
The Syrian grape and citron's rind are thine:
There busy zephyrs fan the still alcove,
By palm-trees curtain'd, and contriv'd for love;
There ALLA bids the spicy shrubs exhale
Their balmy odours, and enrich the vale;
There in thy presence would I pass my days,
Nor think of thrones, nor war, nor songs of praise:
Or there, if prospects please my charmer's sight,
From high Kehoa's mosques first tipt with light,
To where the flaming chariot of the Sun
Behind the Western hills is wont to run,
On a pagoda's top the eye commands
Vast stores of cattle, grain, and cultur'd lands.

Why then KALASSA, dost thou shun the youth,
Whose sighs are rapture, and whose words are truth?
Whither, my love?  O whither wouldst thou stray?
Within my courts are baths &mdash; there bursting fountains play;
There shalt thou sit o'ercanopied with plumes,
While Omman's pearls and Hadramut's perfumes
Serve to delight thee, and those charms adorn
That shame the beauty of the bashful morn;
Thick clouds of incense on the breeze shall rise
From lofty tripods, and enshade the skies;
Pomegranates, dates, and other luscious fruits,
Shall feast the senses; Princes shall proclaim
In lands remote thy beauty, power, and name.
For thee shall crystal goblets brightly blaze,
And Gani's diamonds shed their lucid rays;
For thee those diamonds round thy chalice hung
In loose festoons, on threads of silver strung;
For thee shall melted rubies largely stream,
And lave the sparkling cup's capacious brim,
Make glad the heart, and feast the tasteful eye,
And wake the soul to Love's voluptuous joy.

Whatever Nature gives, or Art affords,
Is thine, my fair, so thou wilt be thy Lord's;
My love, my gifts, ah, how canst thou decline,
Whose court's a cottage, and whose grove's a vine?
Come, bright KALASSA, to my throne repair,
Thou loveliest gem, thou fairest of the fair!
Come, great SULTANA, be my bride by law,
And let thy splendour like thy beauty awe!
Thou PEARL of ASIA, SHEBA'S loveliest QUEEN,
Come to my Courts, and let thy charms be seen;
There wield my sceptre, all my wealth divide,
And o'er my boundless realms sole Sovereign preside!

Alas, I only murmur to the wind;
My colour flies, my mistress is unkind,
Here have I traced her name upon the shore,
The sands shall tell what damsel I adore;
The name these sands so faithlessly impart
Lives in the graven tablet of my heart.
GENIUS of LOVE, by this bless'd spell arise,
And guide KALASSA to her SHADIR'S eyes,
That, ere the sun descends, I yet may tell
I saw &mdash; I lov'd, and seeing, lov'd too well.
Sad was the day when I from battle rode
Flush'd with success, triumphant like a God,
Through Persia's plains, and 'mong the pressing crowd
Distinguish'd her, for whom I meanly bow'd;
Else had I not these ceaseless torments prov'd,
Else had I not so vain, so fondly, lov'd.

Oh GENIUS, teach thy suppliant to persuade
With magic eloquence his favourite Maid,
Make her cold bosom feel thy power, and burn,
And bid her breathe the unknown sigh in turn.&mdash;
Hark!  the loud thunder breaks, the waves expand,
And lo, the GENIUS comes at my command;
Wrapp'd in a cloud he sails, and yonder see
The fair KALASSA steps in haste to me!
Blest be the GENIUS, and rever'd the Power
That led my wandering Love along this shore;
Led her, with heavenly passion in her eyes,
To charm, to soften, gladden and surprize.
