SYLVIA.
Come, my gentle RUSLAND, come, forsake the barren Mountain,
Lead for me my thirsty flocks to yon refreshing fountain:
Weary, love, I really am, and sick at heart with sorrow&mdash;
For I have been a slave all day, and must be so tomorrow.

Scorch'd with heat, or pinch'd with cold, what serves to say I'm weary?
Ten long lonely miles must I the fowls to market carry:
I must early rise to lead the cattle forth at morning,
Mine the task to count them too, and fold them at returning.

All the houshold cares are mine; &mdash; I glean in harvest weather;
At Christmas fetch in wood for fire, and spin whole nights together:
Ah!  but were my Lover by, how easy were my labour!
Not so light the village dance, nor half so brisk the tabor!

Lack-a-day, the moments creep, or RUSLAND loiters sadly;
Mournful does his absence seem &mdash; but then we meet more gladly!
Have I miss'd the leafy shade that screens us from intrusion?
Oh, no, the spot that Lovers choose admits of no delusion!

Didst thou not, young hunter, say, provided I came hither,
We should talk of fairy feats, or sit and sing together?
Wherefore dost thou tarry then? &mdash; To judge by my emotion,
Swifter than an arrow's flight should be a Lover's motion.

Say, can any artful Nymph, more fair or more prevailing,
Bid thee disannul thy vows, nor heed my sad bewailing?
Had thy love been as true as mine, the Nymph had been rejected;
RUSLAND had not linger'd thus, nor SYLVIA thus expected.

Oft have I hear wise ones say, "Ye beautiful, believe us,
Men by nature faithless are, and study to deceive us."
Tell me, RUSLAND, is it true &mdash; can I no more delight thee?
Indeed, no, no, it is not so; &mdash; yet why then do you slight me?

Surely such a gallant youth can never mean to leave me;
Truth ripen'd on his ruddy lips unfashion'd to deceive me:
What so long detains him then? &mdash; May no mishap betide him!
An hour's tedious as a year if I am not beside him.

This playful Kid the Hunter saw, full well do I remember,
Shivering, wet, half-starved, and cold, a victim to December:
Up the dangerous steep he climbed most hazardly to save it,
Pitied it, and nourished it, and to his Mistress gave it.

Go, thou little wanton, go, inform him by thy bleating
How often I have sigh'd in vain, how long have here sat waiting:
Tell him I weave flowery wreathes to chain my fickle rover,
What my fearful blushes hide these tell-tale wreaths discover!

Tell him how the roses weep, like me with heads reclining,
Paler all their colour fades, they sicken too with pining;
Tell him though, if he return, his presence will revive them,
Make their bloom more vivid glow, and sweeter fragrance give them.

Say for him alone I stay, for him shall I be scolded,
Soon must all the goats be milk'd, at dusk the sheep be folded;
Else silently my father frowns, my cruel step-dame chides me,
And peevishly her fretful son with scoffing taunts derides me.

My love is wise, and, so belike, disdains a simple creature;
If so, why did he kiss her cheek, or why so fondly treat her?
Why carve her name on rinds of trees, why comfort her when weeping?
Why tune for her his beechen flute, or watch beside him sleeping?

Soon the nightly dews will fall, the sun is fast descending,
And see along the watery moor the mountain shades extending;
Did he come, the time were short to relish mutual pleasure,
Oh would the chace were earlier done, or I had longer leisure!

Hereafter I will love no more; &mdash; hence, hence capricious passion;
RUSLAND'S false, and so will I, for falsehood is the fashion:
Methought I heard his distant horn &mdash; my resolution's broken;
And that I love my RUSLAND still this beating heart's the token.
