Ah how long and how earnest I've strove,
Midst the stings of neglect and despair,
The rude fetters of LOVE to remove,
And his name from my memory to tear;
But, alas!  every effort is vain,
Still my passion must baffle each art,
Still I cherish with rapture my chain,
And his image will reign in my heart.

If with him to a desart I stray,
Or range the wild woodlands among,
An injunction on time would I lay,
For 'tis HEAVEN to list to his song;
But for pleasure ah where can I rove?
In each circle abstracted I pine,
And the world must a wilderness prove,
To a heart so dejected as mine.

Can I ever forget his soft power,
When first the lone arbour we prest?
And if ever I think of that hour,
Can I vaunt me a bosom at rest?
Still his vanish'd caresses I mourn,
Still my mind must each solace defy,
And controul still remembrance must scorn,
Tho' it often would spare me a sigh.

No enchantment has friendship for me,
My depression no friends can remove;
They can never persuade me I'm free,
'Till they teach me the means not to love.
They may make me contented appear,
If awhile from retirement I steal,
They perhaps may suppress a warm tear,
But they cannot forbid me to feel.

I have prov'd every pang from disdain,
Which a bosom susceptive could own,
But, alas!  I should never complain,
For the fondest endearments I've known.
His frowns may deprive me of joy,
May suspend every comfort awhile,
But a moment their force can destroy&mdash;
There's a magic that dwells in his smile.

Yet I fain from my mind would efface
The mingled sensations I feel,
For me tender return can I trace,
On that heart where I languish to steal.
HOPE oft' o'er my sorrows will bend,
And will oft' his indifference mask;
But PITY is all she will lend,
And PITY is not what I ask.

Ah then will I silently grieve,
Nor the warmth of my feelings betray;
My tears shall my anguish relieve,
And my sighs to his pillow shall stray;
Yet tell him not, streamlet, whose eyes,
Have thy delicate current opprest&mdash;
Ah!  tell him, soft gale, thou art sighs,
But never reveal from whose breast!
