The Nymphs a steepy Mountain did ascend
Where CAMBRIA does its lofty Crest extend.
No stately Mansions grac'd the barren Ground;
No Woodbine Rooms, with Rosy Beds, were found;
No luscious Fruits, to cool or slack the Thirst,
But Things appear'd as when created first;
The Air serene and clear; the gentler Breeze
Brings Aromatick Sweets; tho' not from Trees,
From humbler Thyme Erratick here does grow,
Tho' piercing Tempests keeps it Stature low.
The Nymphs ascending the vast steepy Hill,
The Flocks and Herds do with Amazement fill,
Leaving the Pastures they forget to graze,
Erect their Heads, and at the Nymphs they gaze,
Who underneath a Bush by Tempests blown,
A natural Arbour to the View is shown.
Here at each Look they could employ their Sight
From Northern ORCADES to Southern WIGHT.
Here 'twas they sate, and not a Word they spoke,
Till beauteous ALBIA thus her Silence broke.

ALBIA.
My dearest CALEDONIA now appears,
After a Contest of long hundred Years,
With joyful Wreaths around her happy Brow,
Where dismal Yew too long, alas!  did grow.
Come, Sister, speak; we're eas'd of all our Pains;
No more your Legs shall drag the servile Chains,
Or Flocks disturb'd, shall ravage o'er the Plains.
Our Royal SHEPHERDESS, both good and bold,
Unites the Flocks in one commodious Fold.
Here they securely sleep and rest at Night,
No Gallick Wolves the fleecy Tribe affright;
By Day they graze, and most serenely roam,
What joyful Bleatings from the Sheep-walks come!

CALEDONIA.
Health to our Royal SHEPHERDESS, and may
Her Name, united to eternal Day,
From hence to distant Gath with Fame be known,
As in the spacious Streets of Askalon.
May Ages yet unborn, her Altars raise,
Proclaim her Vertues, and Record her Praise.

ALBIA.
Whilst winding Thames shall meet and kiss the Sea,
Unite, and Nature's just Commands obey;
Whilst on its lovely Banks the Herds shall rove,
And beauteous Swans upon its Waters move;
(Union in Rivers too shall be agreed,
And Thames shall murmur with the distant Tweed,
Ripling o'er Shoals, their Sounds shall all agree,
And teach their Notes unto the Cambrian Dee;)
Whilst the black Herds shall in the Meadows rove,
And Sheep the shorter Grass shall eat and love;
Whilst Thyme adores this lofty Mountains Head,
And Bees from it shall suck their daily Bread,
With loaden Shanks flee to their Store, the Hive,
So long Great ANNA and her Fame shall live.

CALEDONIA.
Whilst Northern Hills are spread with beauteous Flocks,
And Waves shall wash the Caledonian Rocks;
Whilst Seas, like mighty Islands, rise and swell,
And Fish beneath those moving Mountains dwell;
Whilst Human Breasts shall Gratitude express,
So long shall live our Royal SHEPHERDESS.

ALBIA.
See the Effects of UNION!&mdash;
Nature, methinks, does raise its drooping Head,
Long Time with Fumes and gloomy Vapours spread;
The dire Hysterick Passion now does yield,
Black Forms retreat, when UNION takes the Field.
The Iron God leaves hammering his Steel,
And the fierce God of War forgets to kill.

CALEDONIA.
Triumphant UNION does ascend on high,
How bright's the Sun, and how serene the Sky?
And o'er the Meads what Flocks of Halcyon fly?
See how the Crowd augments on yonder Plain!
Each Nymph rejoycing with her amorous Swain.
Myrtilla, who such Coyness late exprest,
Now lays her Head on her Philander's Breast.
Envy's supplanted by Coelestial Love,
They all in UNION'S Circle dance and move.

ALBIA.
Unto our View the beauteous Forms appear,
But no less worthy are the Notes we hear:
At once we please the Sight, and feast the Ear.
What Harmony the winged People bring!
How they unite in Voice, and how they sing!
And make the Woods, and verdant Bushes ring!
The Black-bird, Thrush, and Linnet, do out-vy;
The Lark descends in Chorus from the Sky,
And little Robbin does his Trebble try.
Both Men and Birds their warbling Voices raise,
And sing our SHEPHERDESS and UNION'S Praise.

CALEDONIA.
Surely no Human Joy can perfect be.
Lord!  what a hideous ugly Sight I see?
What jarring Sounds, what unharmonious Noise,
More like a Devil's, than a Human Voice,
Salutes my Ears!&mdash;

ALBIA.
I'll tell you, Sister, who those Monsters are;
And telling, is a Caution not to fear.
These are the Elves and Satyrs did oppose,
And up in Rage against the UNION rose;
Who in black Plots did wickedly combine,
And striv'd our Mounds of Peace to undermine:
Baulk'd in their Enterprize, they grin and howl,
And spend their Age in one eternal Growl.

Those unclean Birds, that hover in the Air,
All High-Church Cormorants and Burrards are,
Who, baulk'd of Rapine, and of Blood below,
Extend their Wings, and in the Air they row.
In Malice impotent they screek and cry,
And squirt on honest People as they fly.
But UNION, with it radiant Beams, you'll find,
Will strike 'em dumb, as well as make 'em blind.

CALEDONIA.
My dearest Sister, now the Night draws on,
And we are left by the declining Sun,
The Shepherd to the Fold the Flock does call,
And longer Shadows from the Mountains fall,
Let us retire to Alchoves, take our Ease,
And dream of UNION, and the Streets of PEACE.
