Aid me, my muse, for I would tell of things,
Surpassing all that's mortal:  of wonders
That were they not fresh in our remembrance,
Might be deem'd delusive fiction's offspring.
O!  that my quill were pluck'd from fancy's wing,
Then should I pen my tale in glowing phrase,
For such it merits.  'Tis wonder's offspring,
And fancy should the wond'rous theme record;
I am but earthly, that must plead excuse,
If lack of frenzy'd language shall be found
In this my strange narration.  I possess
Such knowledge of the fact as none can boast,
Save him who wrought the fiction.  He will know
If truth or falsehood stain my Chronicle.
Be he for ever dumb if I speak fair;
If foul-mouth'd lies my story'd page should blot,
Let him the truth proclaim, and stamp me base;
For ever hold me up to public scorn,
That I may bear a liar's hateful name.
Amidst the briny flood proud Albion's cliffs
Majestic shew their fronts.  In altitude
Aspiring to the azure-vaulted roof,
Star fretted.  Its sides of snow complexion
As the adamant indissoluble,
Boldly withstand the surges dread attacks,
And fix'd immutable defy the shock
Of mould'ring time and warring elements.
Upon this Isle renown'd London uprears
Her form magnificent, where liberty,
Enchanting Goddess, sits enthron'd, and smiles
To see her darling children's happiness.
Hard by the bank of silv'ry Thames, where once
A stately palace of the Norfolks stood,
Enacted was my theme's reality.
Long was the Mansion fam'd for its contents.
The walls with rarest works of art were grac'd;
Each chamber boasted some antiquity,
Vouch'd genuine by sages of experience,
Yet one in beauty far excell'd the rest.
A study ample deck'd with choicest works
Of British Authors fam'd.  There might be seen
Of CHAUCER, GOWER, and ST. EDMUND'S MONK,
Of SPENCER, SHAKSPEAR, and an hundred more
Editions rare.  'Twas there you might behold
The wrought apparel of renowned SYDNEY,
The bead-strung tassels of the martyr'd CHARLES,
And blood-stain'd CROMWELL'S coat.  The sculptur'd chair
Where SHAKSPEAR oft hath sat, while, on his knee,
With glowing cheek upon his breast reclin'd,
The lovely ANNA heard his tale of love.
There your eye would gaze on casements lofty
Whose Gothic forms were richly stor'd with glass
Of varied dyes, diffusing wide around
The Rainbow's tints, a gleam monastical.
Besides its Lord, within this mansion dwelt
Two Maids, his Daughters, and a Matron sage;
The soul of one to music was allied,
The pencil grac'd the second's hand; the third
Claim'd kindred with the fire-brain'd God, whose thoughts
In tripping measures flow.  Yet one there was
Beneath this roof, of whom I most would speak,
The last-born of this Family.  A Youth,
Of whom report hath spread a thousand tales
Most to dispraise, few to commend his name....

In early days, the converse of his Sire
Was won't to please his fancy.  With delight
He listen'd to the lays of Antient Times;
Read o'er and o'er old Legendary Tales,
And Ballads that recorded val'rous deeds
Of English Hero's bold.  At length, the fate
Of hapless CHATTERTON assail'd his ear;
Oft' he ponder'd o'er the unhappy record,
Yet would have gladly shar'd his luckless end
To be the partner of his fame renown'd.
Thus time elapsed, till the revolving years
Had Eighteen Summers told.  'Twas then the Youth,
With vanity inspir'd, first dar'd assay
His lofty purpose.  Like th' unthinking Boy
Whose hand untutor'd wou'd the rein assume&mdash;
Of PHEBUS, mettled coursers.  So he strove
To drive the Chariot of our ENGLISH SUN
And bear his Godlike Name.  Th' attempt was bold;
But, like APOLLO'S Son, he aim'd too high,
And, from the lofty seat was headlong hurl'd
By thunders launch'd from direful Critics' hand.&mdash;
But, hold!  Now to rehearse the vary'd themes
His brain assay'd.  Humbly at first he strove
A SIGNATURE to pen.  The CHEAT prevailed;
For most who saw, the FICTION credited.
FAME'S TRUMP then widely spread that wond'rous Tale;
'Twas soon the Public Converse; naught was heard
But SHAKSPEAR'S name rever'd.  Thus accomplish'd
The primal purpose, his procreant brain
Attempted next the STILE to imitate&mdash;
When the Religious Tenets of our BARD
In meekest Strains appear'd.  This was receiv'd,
And by the World admir'd.  Our SHAKSPEARE'S note,
And the receipt, by HEMINGE penn'd, came next
To strike with wonder:  For BILLS of PROMISE
A custom had been deem'd of modern date;
Yet this was overlook'd, so prone is man
To credit wonders which he'd fain believe.

The friendship of SOUTHAMPTON'S Noble Earl,
A tale traditionary next was vouch'd.
The whimsical CONCEIT to COWLEY sent&mdash;
The LETTER OF ELIZABETH renown'd&mdash;
And various Matters of less import, each,
At separate times, and not in mass produc'd,
Were genuine esteem'd.  The alter'd LEAR;
The silken-twisted LOCK to ANNA sent&mdash;
Relic inestimable struck wonder
In the Multitude.  Some, indeed, there were
At first Believers, who, at sight of this,
Shrunk back in doubt.  Still unappal'd the Youth
Boldly dar'd adventure.  And VORTIGERN
At length appear'd &mdash; But more of this anon&mdash;
Countless RECEIPTS, and, after lapse of time,
The ANNALS of our SECOND HARRY fam'd,
And peerless ROSAMOND, still multiply'd
Th' advent'rous FABRICATION.&mdash;

Of this enough.  'Tis fit I now rehearse
Th' OPINIONS vary'd of the numberless
Who saw the FICTION. &mdash; The Mansion's open,
When straight appears the Master of the whole,
Who rises, and, with free and courteous mein,
Each Stranger greets.  Then most eloquently
The forged Tale relates; after the which,
Forth from the massive Chest, his treasure draws
And offers it to public view&mdash;....
