O Thou!  whose fame, with undiminish'd rays,
From utmost Indus to the frozen Pole
Conspicuous shines, and claims the meed of praise
Where'er the wild winds blow, or waters roll;
With beating hearts thee, mighty GEORGE, we greet,
And hail thee doubly welcome to our calm retreat!

E'en on the confines of this sea-girt Isle
From all the splendors of a Court retir'd,
How happy we, to share a Sov'reign's smile&mdash;
A Sov'reign's presence, by the World admir'd!
Long in th' Historic Page shall Weymouth shine,
And future Bards for her the lasting wreaths shall twine.

Whether reclin'd on undulating waves
That, fring'd with silver, kiss our yellow shores;
Or deep retir'd amidst yon sea-green caves,
You scorn the central tempest when it roars,
Haste, all ye sportive Neriades, once again,
To hail the mighty Ruler of your wide Domain!

While Gallia's PRINCE on Discord's billows tost,
Crush'd by the chain of Anarchy, repines&mdash;
His Throne insulted, and his Empire lost,
To wild Despair his ev'ry hope resigns;
Commiseration drops a tear, to see
A fallen Monarch captive, tho' a People free.

More happy we, where Peace celestial reigns,
And fell Commotion hides its Hydra head;
Where not a voice or murmurs or complains,
Nor Foe, nor Famine, strikes the Land with dread;
And neighb'ring Nations, fraught with envy, see
A happy People smile &mdash; a mighty Monarch free!

May He, whose arm supports those Orbs so fair,
That roll their courses thro' the realms on high,
Shed all their influence on the ROYAL PAIR,
And amply bless their num'rous Progeny!&mdash;
Sure fix'd as Fate &mdash; unerring as the Sun&mdash;
Thus may the KING OF KINGS' almighty mandate run:

"As arm'd in triple mail, thou Sov'reign blest!
Thy Subjects' love thy strongest guard shall be;
Nor shall one ill thy sacred peace molest
Down the smooth passage to eternity.
O'er thee shall Liberty her banners rear,
And, with thy People, thou her choicest gifts shall share."

Fir'd with a ray of Gratitude divine,
With which each bosom glows, or ought to glow,
An humble Muse attempts a wreathe to twine
(With vain ambition!) 'round the Royal brow.
May her faint efforts wake some nobler Lyre,
Whose notes but with the mass of Nature shall expire!
