The Die is cast &mdash; and Hope, celestial Maid,
Who loves to visit more the Rustic Cell,
And the sad Captive low in Dungeon laid,
Or near the wretched Bed of Sickness dwell,
Than with the Rich, who others far excell,
Is fled for ever:  (When Life's better Part,
Hygeia, sought some happier Dell)
She fan'd a Ray of Comfort in the Heart,
'Till fell, relentless Death had shot his fatal Dart.

His manly Sense and Virtues to pourtray,
With all the innate Sweetness of his Mind,
Requires of abler Bards the chastest Lay;
Who in soft Strains, with strictest Truth combin'd,
May leave unsung, untouch'd, no Trait behind.
Alas!  how feeble is my humble Verse!
But real Sorrow rambles unconfin'd,
And, to strict Forms and fetter'd Rules averse,
Will its sad Plaints and Moans in Accents wild rehearse.

In firmest Union Time our Hearts had wove,
The same our Pleasure, and the same our Pain;
Each to outvie his Friend in Kindness strove.&mdash;
How oft I've seen him on the scented Plain,
In Summer's scorching Sun, and Winter's Rain!
With eager Eye, he'd watch the lingering Morn,
For from no Toil his Passion would refrain;
And much he lov'd to hear the Hound and Horn,
Or strike, with skilful Aim, th' ill-fated Bird forlorn.

In jests, and merry Tales, and joyous Song,
He kept the festive Board in constant Roar;
Clear was his Voice, and as his Reason strong:
Well was he vers'd in Academic Lore,
For no Sage Clerk than he had studied more.
With pious Care his well-taught Flocks among
He strew'd of Holy Writ the choicest Store,
On their astonish'd Ears Attention hung,
Unmov'd, for "Truths Divine came mended from that tongue."

Tho' round thy Knees the helpless Infants play,
Fair Dame!  with Reason check the streaming Eye;
A greater Tribute let Affection pay,
And with Instruction their sad Loss supply;
Teach them, belov'd like him, to live and die.
Let us, how short soe'er our Thread is spun,
Forbear t' arraign the mighty Power on high;
And, at the Moment our last Glass is run,
With pious Resignation cry &mdash; "Thy Will be done."
