'Twas night &mdash; BRITANNIA melancholy lay,
Listening the horrid storm that round her spread:
Her aweful Trident smote the sullen Bay;
Languid &mdash; the starry Honours of her Head
Obscure, neglected, press'd the barren Strand&mdash;
Tears dimm'd her heavenly Cheek, and nerveless sunk her Head.

Was it for this that Goddess born I reign'd
Daughter of LIBERTY, whose chearing Light
The bounteous SIRE of Nature hath ordain'd,
To gladden mortal, and immortal sight;
Blest with whose Presence, all my Cares would cease,
This Gloom be Splendor, and these Horrors Peace!

Was it for this my ALFRED, great in War,
Greater in Peace, by equal Law restor'd,
Twin'd the free Oak round my victorious Spear,
And o'er the Sea my rising Glory pour'd?
Was it for this my Sons indignant broke
The papal Chain, and home-bred Tyrant's Yoke!

Ah!  boots it now to think of Foes subdu'd,
And Commerce triumphing on every Wave;
Protected Nations; and myself renew'd,
In the free offspring Heaven indulgent gave,
While rising Colonies the Globe embrac'd,
And my imperial Throne in willing Hearts was plac'd!

Whom shall I call the Sister of my Love?
What Child supports the Parent's drooping Side?
Whose Fears shall Britain's Indignation move?
My own forsake me, and my Foes deride!
And am I thus a Daughter of the Sky!
Condemn'd to Woe and Shame &mdash; yet destin'd not to die!

E'en in my Senate, whose all honour'd Voice
Should breathe the genuine Language of the Whole,
Corruption treads on violated Laws,
And partial Claims the common Rights have stole.
Alfred and Edward, in your hallow'd rest
Hear not my Fate &mdash; 'twas Anguish to the Blest!

And Thou, late parted Shade, whose ample Mind
Fill'd with my Greatness Earth's remotest Bounds;
Withering the giant Strength of Foes combin'd!
Timely remov'd, thou seest not my Wounds!
The Storms of Foreign War I still might bear,
And triumph in the Shock &mdash; within is my Despair.

Of Right despoil'd, and witless of Defence
To me &mdash; theirselves &mdash; my Englishmen are lost!
Great but in Name, and free but in Pretence:
Vain is the native Spirit which they boast,
And nought but Riot reigns &mdash; ah woe is me!
Or foul inglorious Sloth, where once reign'd LIBERTY.

She said &mdash; when sudden through the Darkness shone
A Glory might eclipse meridian Day;
Transcending more the Radiance of the Sun,
Than his full Beam the dying Taper's Ray.&mdash;
Rejoic'd Britannia rose!  and Freedom press'd
Her darling Child with Rapture to her Breast.

No, my lov'd Daughter, think not I can leave
That Glory which I cherish as my own,
Vainly shall Force assail, or Fraud deceive;
Of Adamant is thy immortal Throne.
Sooner this Isle shall wandering range the Sea,
Than Britain claim in vain the Bliss of being free.

Thy Sons awakening list to Virtue's Call,
Touch'd by Misfortune's animating Spear;
And Strains of Freedom fill the spacious Hall,
Such as their gen'rous Sires might joy to hear.
Nor long ere Thou behold thy Britons wield,
To guard the sacred Land, my all-defending Shield.

Lo where thy Sister leads her active Youth,
The Pride, the Bulwark of Hibernian Land!
Hark!  how she hails thee from the Heart of Truth,
Prepar'd to join the free, the friendly Hand!
Nor mourn thy sever'd Colonies, who prove,
By independent Worth, their Claim to double Love.

Self-rule be thine &mdash; Commerce, and happy Peace,
Not the vain Shadow of Supremacy
O'er kindred Lands &mdash; 'tis fix'd in Truth's Decrees
That never Nation shall continue free,
Or know true Happiness but those alone
Who prize the Rights of others dearly as their own.

What if thy Star of Conquest shine no more,
My brighter Sun its Absence can reward.
Not all the Spoils of desolating War,
Not all the Triumphs of the Julian Sword
Can boast of ought but splendid Infamy;
Glory's fair Banner beams not but from me.

Nor of lost Patriots in Despair complain,
To lead thy Sons once more to true Renown;
Nor the degenerate, selfish, venal Train
Insensible to Virtue's offer'd Crown;
Of such regardless better Hopes pursue:
And see the encreasing Band led by the chosen few.

There are whose true Nobility aspires
Beyond the Pomp of titled Ancestry:
There are whose equal Bosoms Virtue fires
With the high Aim of making Millions free.
The deathless Glories great CHATHAM won,
My sacred Cause maintain'd, reflects upon the Son.

Whatever Rights establish'd, or restor'd,
Illumine EDWARD, or my ALFRED'S Reign;
Whatever Blessings all my Fondness shower'd,
Those RIGHTS, those Blessings court thee now again.
Where'er the Shrine of FREEDOM is rever'd,
LENOX, PITT, SAWBRIDGE, FOX, JEBB, CARTWRIGHT, shall be heard.

Nor Time shall pour Oblivion on his Name,
Whose faithful Care and Love of public Weal
Wakes every Citizen to virtuous Shame;
Nor bids him trust in mercenary steel;
But arm'd in conscious worth grasp the free Blade,
And shew himself her Son when BRITAIN calls for Aid.

Rise, then, in renovated Lustre rise!
O'er the glad Main thy peaceful Sails be spread!
Again thy starry Front salute the skies,
Nor ever more decline thine honour'd head,
Once re-enthron'd on VIRTUE'S aweful Height,
Let no inferior Prospects tempt thy devious Sight.
