Oh!  she is dead &mdash; dead too in early prime,
PORTLAND'S bright gem, and hath not left her Peer,
Who would not sing for her? &mdash; and bid his Muse
With honest sorrows lave her hallow'd bier.

Where silver THAMES' meand'ring waters flow,
Reflecting, BULSTRODE, thy once happy shades;
I fly from crowds to SOLITUDE and WOE,
When solemn night the silent world survades;
And while responsive PHILOMEL'S sad song
With sweeter woe my falling strains prolong.
My infant Lyre's untutor'd notes deplore,
The soul of MUSIC, now alas!  no more.

Breathe forth, my Lyre, such soft and plaintive strains
As erst for gentle LYCIDAS were sung,
Or sweet CATULLUS pip'd on Latian plains;
Or Lucy dead, from her fond Poet wrung&mdash;
Yet shall thy notes alas!  but faintly prove,
Her wond'rous worth, our grief, despair and love.
No loss of high-wrought fancy I deplore,
But PORTLAND'S DUCHESS, now alas!  no more.

Lament, ye waters, and ye woods and groves
Reject the leafy honors of your heads,
Oh!  fade, you bowers, and you sweet alcoves,
And droop each glory of the painted meads,
The darkling walk for contemplation meet,
The silent grot, and ev'ry cool retreat;
The taste that gave corrective grace deplore,
In ruins mourn that taste, alas!  no more.

Oh!  if among these shades where ev'ry Muse
Were wont to dwell, a ling'ring one remains,
As some sad wretch whom hostile fate pursues,
Self-banish'd from his love and native plains;
Reluctant quits the scene of happier days,
Inventive in a thousand fond delays.
Oh!  come and teach me how I may deplore,
The Muses fav'rite, now alas!  no more.

Tell not of titled fame, and lengthen'd line
Of greatness fading on old Record's eye,
Tho' these, fair PORTLAND, spotless these were thine,
Yet cou'd thy virtues all their want supply;
Titles to them submissive bent the knee,
Or prouder grew by being confer'd on thee:
FAME, FORTUNE, HONOURS, then with me deplore&mdash;
Your proudest boast, but now alas!  no more.

Oh!  she was all cou'd give a charm to life,
The pride of virtue and her sexes grace;
The peerless daughter, mother, friend and wife:
And on her sweet, benign, expressive face,
Play'd the soft beams of charity and love;
Her soul which fill'd, and acts were wont to prove;
But lent her Sexes lustre to restore,
Heav'n claims it's own, and we the claim deplore.

Remorseless DEATH!  what wayward thought malign,
Urg'd thee to deal the ever fatal stroke?
Fond expectation's glass, in which did shine
Long years of social joy, why hast thou broke?
Her thou cou'dst strike, while poverty and pain,
Despair and grief invok'd thy dart in vain,
Despair, pain, poverty, and grief deplore,
Your ready succour, now alas!  no more.

So some tall tree, the beauty of the grove,
Around whose head the balmy zephyrs play,
Beneath whose shade the sprightly wood-nymphs move,
In merry cadence to the shepherd's lay;
Quick by the light'ning's blast is level'd low,
While sordid brambles 'scape the fatal blow:
The shepherds sad, and sighing nymphs deplore
The genial scene, their haunt, alas!  no more.

You seraph Virtues which so well she lov'd,
O say!  where were ye when your fav'rite died?
Nor in the paths of pining care you rov'd,
Nor where keen want and bending age abide,
Nor where soft sentiment with pang refin'd,
Claim'd the sweet solace of a kindred mind;
There you'd have found, whom vainly I deplore,
And sav'd your pupil, now alas!  no more.

Thou QUEEN of NIGHT, more radiant hast thou shone,
As here she stray'd and told of Virtue's charms;
Wou'dst bend approving from thy cloudless throne,
While the fond husband clasp'd her in his arms,
And as she spoke (and rising raptures grew)
View'd in herself the picture that she drew;
As  now her tomb you nightly wander o'er,
O!  veil thy splendor, and in tears deplore.

Ah!  sad survivor of the happiest pair,
That ever prov'd the fondest wedded lot;
How shall you bear your destiny severe?
Oh!  how shall you bear your destiny severe?
Oh!  how shal bliss and DORA be forgot?
Wheree'er you tread, wheree'er you turn your eyes,
Of that lost bliss new images arise.
Remember'd joys shall teach thee to deplore
Their darling source, ah!  now alas!  no more.

And you, her children, what a loss is yours!
A love that cherish'd, precept that improv'd,
A pure example giving precept force,
A parent-friend respected and belov'd,
Who gave to duty all the charms of choice,
Cou'd rule with smiles, bore magic in her voice;
Sure never filial sorrow did deplore
So good a mother, now alas!  no more.

But vain my efforts to express their state;
What they have lost, I try to tell in vain;
Had I been doom'd to such disastrous fate,
Ah!  me, in words I cou'd not now complain;
E'en silence here (most eloquent in woe)
Wou'd hide a grief she cou'd not fully shew.
Shall I then mock expression, and deplore
Thee, gentle PORTLAND, now alas!  no more.

Oh!  no, upon some drooping willow dank,
Here will I hang my ineffectual lyre;
Thy genius, THAMES, as wand'ring on thy bank,
Shall strike the strings and deathless woe inspire,
In sounds immortal mourn for DORA gone,
And sing a Husband's sorrows with her own;
Do thou, sweet Heav'n, that Husband's peace restore,
And bid him cease a sainted Wife deplore.

Ah!  sad survivor of the happiest pair,
Tell him on ev'ry ill, a cheery ray
The seraph Hope beams from magic eye;
Through life to death she lights the doubtful way,
Attends us still, nor quits us when we die;
Then sure in brightest robe the angel-maid,
(By Faith and gentle Charity array'd)
Has led to thee the object we deplore,
Where he shall meet her, and to part no more!
