Ye trees, does your foliage delay,
Refusing to veil with its shade
That spot &mdash; once so chearful and gay,
That cottage &mdash; in ruin now laid?

While others arise on the plain,
These walls in sad silence repose;
As never expecting again
Such social delights to enclose.

Fair decency, cheerful content,
By industry honest were won:
Here quiet his days Owen spent,
And counted these blessings his own.

His forge knew no weapons of blood,
Devoted to peaceful employ;
The stranger partook of his food,
Nor want chill'd the bosom of joy.

Yet, torn from his babes, and his home,
From his consort so fond and so fair,
He must change, for a prison's dark gloom,
This balmy, salubrious air.

Her infant new-born at her breast,
His Doro beheld him depart;
She sunk, with her sorrows opprest,
(Ah more &mdash; thou must ten times more smart!)

"And O if the lashes," she cried,
"My Owen be forc'd to endure,
With his blood if the scourges be died,
His life will sink under it sure!"

See her Owen returning again,
His neighbours all smiling around,
His innocence free from a stain,
And no lash has inflicted a wound!

How chang'd the glad prospect, how soon!
See the clouds of Rebellion arise!
The prison had then been a boon
Most grateful to Owen's sad eyes.

What, though from the maddening train,
As soon as he might he retir'd;
In his cottage resolv'd to remain,
While innocence courage inspir'd!

But innocence cannot avail,
When danger like this is so nigh:
This Doro, all weeping and pale,
Revolv'd, and implor'd him to fly.

For see, breathing vengeance and dread,
The disciplin'd armies appear;
The bands so tumultuous are fled,
And the cannon's dire thunder they hear!

But resolv'd in his cottage to stay,
In his cottage mild Owen they found;
Like furies they seize on their prey,
And his bosom receives the death wound.

The firebrands his dwelling invade,
The smoke &mdash; it ascends to the sky;
There innocence injur'd may plead!
There heard is the sufferer's cry!

Then Doro, her infants around,
Beheld her lov'd home wrapt in fire;
They heard the explosion's dread sound,
And in agony call'd on their sire.

Her stores by hard industry gain'd,
To rapine and flames were a prey:
But ah &mdash; if her Owen remain'd,
Of how little value are they!

She darts through the furious crowd,
Resolving his fate to explore:
She calls on her Owen aloud;&mdash;
She sees him &mdash; all bath'd in his gore!

Oh then, on his corse as she lay,
Her babe all unconscious beside,
In vain she invok'd the cold clay;
Her Owen no longer replied.

The warriors, reproach'd by her moans,
Their bosoms all poison'd with strife,
With insults reply to her groans,
And threaten her innocent life.

Oh what was her life in that hour!&mdash;
The load she had gladly resign'd;
Nor insults, nor threats could have pow'r
To quell the fierce pangs of her mind.

She lives for her fatherless train,
She lives, though her comfort is dead,
Chill poverty's gripe to sustain,
And strive for a morsel of bread.

Humanity weeps at the tale;
Yet frequent such scenes will appear,
Till Concord's soft voice shall prevail,
Which angels delighted will hear.
