In a dark cave with murky vapours hung,
Impervious to the eye of day,
That strikes the wicked with dismay,
A hellish monster, from the furies sprung,
Had taken his accurs'd domain,
And o'er a band of fiends assum'd his reign;
Around, with scowling looks they wait,
Prepar'd to load the wings of fate;
First ANARCHY in frantic posture stood,
Ready to bathe distracted states in blood;
Her scatter'd locks in clotted ringlets float
To phrensy's gale, her arm still gor'd,
With GALLIA'S blood upheld a reeking sword,
And next to her, in place, and note,
Fell DISCORD low'rd, but from the rest apart;
For her unquiet restless heart,
Not with her hellish sisters e'en agreed,
To JEALOUSY and ENVY oft she turn'd,
Her glaring eyeballs that with fury burn'd,
And where they pointed, she would speed,
To blow the clarion shrill, and bid the battle bleed.
Next FAMINE stood, with meagre look,
Her wasted form with weakness shook;
And DESOLATION at her side,
Spread her destruction far and wide;
MURDER was in the squallid band,
With fear he trod, a dagger lay conceal'd
Beneath his vest, a pois'nous bowl in hand.
REVENGE his purpose, COWARDICE his shield.
A num'rous host beside of fiends attend,
And all before their KING blood-thirsty Treason bend.
He calls, with rumbling noise the den resounds,
ATTENTION wakes, all listen to his roar,
With such, when TEMPESTS growl the back resounds,
Whilst foaming surges break upon the shore.
He beckons MURDER; lo!  before his throne,
The deadly Spectre quick appears,
Erects his guilty brow, and opes his ears,
Whilst thus the Potentate his dark design makes known.

"To yonder island in the wat'ry waste,
With all thy instruments of horror haste,
There thou wilt find a KING belov'd
By all his subjects, by the GODS approv'd;
Beneath his sway the LAND is blest,
COMMERCE extends her golden arms,
There HAPPINESS has built her nest,
Secure amidst the world's alarms.
Go thither, bend thy steps and mar their joy,
And all thy blackest fiends employ,
With thy horror-spreading breath,
Blow on their plains the blast of DEATH.
First at their MONARCH'S heart direct thy steel,
Let the obnoxious TYRANT bleed,
Then must all other woes succeed,
And all the earth the heavy blow shall feel;
Dispatch." &mdash; He ceas'd; a beaming light
Struck the amaz'd assembly with affright,
They shrink from the unwonted glare,
While sounds of chains clink thro' the air.
Sudden a mighty form is seen,
Of Herculean strength, but lovely mien,
JUSTICE her name, by BRITAIN'S GENIUS led,
She sought the SOVEREIGN of the cave,
With aspect wild he would have fled,
But the fair GODDESS strong as brave,
Seiz'd on the fiend and to the ground,
With all his crew the monster bound;
Then sallying out, the cavern door
She plac'd a rock of adamant before,
And thus the GENIUS of the ISLE addrest&mdash;
"Go BRITAIN, go, enjoy thy wonted rest,
Be happy still, thy GEORGE shall be my care,
No impious hands shall rob him of repose,
Be firm, be still thyself, unmov'd by fear,
The GODS thy friend, who dare to be thy foes?"
