COLIN.
These three long Years I have not CUDDY seen,
Say gentle Shepherd whither hast thou been?

CUDDY.
Through all the Plains around I've gayly stray'd,
And won the Heart of many a beauteous Maid;
I've wanton'd all the sportive Hours away,
Beneath the Shade, or on the new-mown Hay;
How have I lain, beside the Stream reclin'd,
On the soft Bosom of fair ROSALIND;
And slily stealing from the mantling Shade,
I left CLEONE there, no more a Maid:
Thus, like a Bee, from Flow'r to Flow'r I rov'd,
And rifled ev'ry Nymph I thought I lov'd.

COLIN.
How diff'rent, CUDDY, is thy Choice and mine,
Blest with my Lot, I cannot envy thine.
Since first you left the Beauties of this Plain,
I've been the happiest of the rural Train:
No more from Fair to Fair I wildly rov'd,
But fix'd on one, and her alone I lov'd;
Our little Stock we have together join'd,
And Happiness, in Wedlock, now we find.

CUDDY.
What, silly Lout, thy Liberty resign,
And then prefer thy slavish State to mine?
Tho' I've been beat by many a lusty Swain,
Because forsooth I've with their Sweethearts lain;
Tho' I before the Justice too have been,
In Market-Town tho' in the Stocks was seen,
Yet what care I, fond Swain; I still am free,
And will enjoy the Sweets of Liberty.

COLIN.
Ah CUDDY, CUDDY, where is now thy Fold?
Thy Sheep, thy Crook, thy Cot, and all are sold:
See, ev'ry Day, my little Flock encrease,
While all around my Cot dwells smiling Peace;
Thou can'st not tell how greatly I am blest,
No Blows, nor Justices disturb my Rest:
Soon as the Lark on tremb'ling Pinions born,
Salutes, with trilling Notes, the rising Morn,
No more in Pens my Sheep I then restrain,
But watch them nibbling, on the verdant Plain:
Where, o'er the Pebbles, bubbling Eddies play,
On boxen Pipe I tune my rustic Lay;
And while the vocal Waters dance along,
My SPARABELLA chears me with a Song:
I cull the sweetest Flow'rs that wildly blow,
To weave a Chaplet, for my Fair one's Brow;
Then when at Ev'ning I have penn'd my Fold,
What little tender Tales of Love are told!
At home two beauteous Children have we got,
The Joy and Pleasure of our peaceful Cot:
O CUDDY, CUDDY, thou doth little know
The various Blisses that from Wedlock flow!

CUDDY.
You, like a Lawyer at Assize-time, hide
From other's Eyes your Cause's faulty Side:
For though some lovely Damsel I might find,
With whom the Marriage-Knot I'd choose to bind,
Yet truly COLIN I should greatly dread,
Lest a Wife prove inconstant to my Bed;
Besides I think that I could never bear,
The Noise of Children, always in my Ear.

COLIN.
Oh when I hear my darling Babes complain,
What Pleasure is there mingled with the Pain;
It wakes within my Breast parental Care,
And that you'd unrepining learn to bear:
But as for Jealousy, ah!  fly her Pow'r,
Or date thy Ruin from that very Hour:
When Wives prove false, most commonly we find,
The Husband first was jealous or unkind.
Young BUMPKINET, alas!  thou know'st him well,
And apt at present, CUDDY, is the Tale,
Wedded BUXOMA, scarce three Months ago;
And now unhappy are they both I trow:
Mistrust soon Room within his Bosom found,
He told his Anguish to the Swains around;
All hope by turns her Favour now to win,
She learnt the Cause nor was asham'd to sin:
Say is BUXOMA then so much to blame,
Since BUMPKINET first blasted her good Name.
If thou would'st happy be, thou first must find,
Her thou could'st love alike, for Form and Mind;
And let not Beauty only bind the Chain;
For weak 'twill prove unless the Heart you gain:
Then let good Temper be thy Rule of Life,
So shalt thou have a fond and faithful Wife.

CUDDY.
Tho' I'm convinc'd of what thou'st said, yet now
That I'm too young to wed, you must allow.

COLIN.
Ah simple Shepherd be not thus misled,
For Youth's the Time in which we ought to wed.

CUDDY.
The grave Ones say we single should remain,
Till we a Family can well maintain:
Children will come, and Children must be fed,
These COLIN injure those who early wed.

COLIN.
No CUDDY, no, the greatest Joy in Life,
Is to maintain one's Children, and one's Wife;
For them I gladly toil the livelong Day,
When Smiles at Night, my Tenderness repay.
In Youth our Manners we alike can frame,
And learn t' approve, and disapprove the same:
When Years encrease, inflexible we grow,
As aged Trees will rather break, than bow.
Let not false Prudence make thee stay till old,
Nor barter Love, and Happiness, for Gold.

CUDDY.
The Sun is sunk beneath the ruddy West,
And now 'tis Time thy Lambkins were at Rest;
Perhaps hereafter I may change my Life,
If lovely PHILLIS will be CUDDY'S Wife.
