Uncertain April quits the low'ring Sky,
Fair Nature wears again her gayer Robe,
And jocund May, bedeckt with many a Flow'r,
Succeeds to rule again the laughing Globe.

Ah!  now no more we greet thy glad Approach,
No more, sweet Month, thy op'ning Beauties praise;
But mourn expiring 'midst a thousand Sighs,
The happy Liberty of better Days.

Thy inauspicious Dawn has first beheld
The fatal Blow which Privilege receives;
In sad Remembrance droop each beauteous Flow'r,
Strew'd be the Ground with early falling Leaves.

Where wast thou, God of Love?  where fled thy Steps,
When Senates pass'd the cruel, sad Decree;
When they combin'd, with heavy Tax to load
Each passing Letter, now no longer free?

For most thy Vot'ries, Love, the Change shall feel;
No more the faithful Paper hastes to bear
The secret Intercourse of ardent Vows,
Till Mark unwelcome stains its Surface fair.

Unless perchance by Member superscrib'd
With whole Direction, free the Billet flies;
But who shall choose such Secrets to impart,
Or shew his Mistress to another's Eyes?

Perhaps, in senatorial Dignity profound,
He too, intreated, many a Murmur makes;
Shall much complain of Labor now increas'd,
And grudge his Trouble, e'en for Lovers Sakes.

Ceas'd then the happy Means of Converse sweet,
When distant Counties faithful Lovers part;
The frequent Letter, frequent Charge awaits,
And free no more the Feelings of the Heart.

Mourn this, ye Maids, that wont with annual Step
Joyful to trip it o'er the London Street;
Mourn this, who now around th' high tap'ring Pole
With lighter Foot prepare the Ground to beat.

No more the varied Wreath of Flowers cull'd,
On high, shall beautify the rural Scene;
Th' uplifted Load no more of massy Plate,
Bedeckt with chearful Ornament, be seen.

In Black alone, with solemn Pace advance,
Ye Youths, a mournful Garland now be borne;
And this, while sorrow'd Measures strike the Ear,
Heap'd up, let many unuseless Frank adorn.

Still each returning Year let Mourning mark
The hated Dawn of this once joyful Day;
Till welcome Letters once again are free,
Still celebrate no more the Month of May.
