Black as when Northern Tempests frown,
In Night's horrific Gloom;
Loud as the awful Thunders groan,
When Heav'n's dread Judgments come:
So late from *********'s morbid Breath,
Foam'd forth Contagion, Stamps, and Death!
Nor less the clatt'ring Chain of Slav'ry stuns,
Imperial Liberty, and Britain's bravest Sons.

In vain from hostile Plains of War,
From Ab'ram's fatten'd Field,
Behold the Victor's trophy'd Car,
A short-liv'd Triumph yield!&mdash;
In vain the dear-earn'd Laurel's bloom,
For Feuds and Dangers lurk at home;
Nor ends the Toils, thy Country's Fears, with Thee,
Lamented Wolfe!  unfortunate in Victory.

What tho' to Albion's distant Shore,
Soil of thy Native Breath!
From foreign Jars, Thou could'st restore,
Peace, purchas'd with thy Death!
Yet what avails the laurell'd Tomb,
Thy Country's Fate while Factions doom,
While venal Parties clog the grave Debate,
And brib'd Corruption saps the Pillars of the State.

Hatch'd in some northern, sickly Fen,
Where Pride and Famine rule,
Or from the foul, infected Brain
Of some designing Tool;
Behold, an hideous Monster born,
That sheds at Birth its frightful Spawn,
And, like devouring Locust, baneful flies,
O'er Britain's destin'd Isle, and Britain's Colonies!

But mark'd with every Tyrant Stain,
Unlike to England's Law,
See the bald Hag provoke Disdain,
And just Resentment draw.
VIRTUE'S brave Sons, an hardy Band!
With patriot Flame united stand;
And stubborn in the Cause of LIBERTY,
Contemn th' ignominious Chain, and dare be free.

Curs'd be the Man, who, born of Hell,
Conceiv'd th' intriguing Plan;
Him blest, who nobly dar'd rebel,&mdash;
And spurn th' invidious Chain.
These, in the List of honest Fame,
Shall hold thro' Time an honor'd Name;
While Those, a Fate for others they design'd,
In Chains of Darkness ever shall their Torment find.

Refulgent as the God of Day,
Burst from the Clouds of Night,
Lo!  foremost in illustrious Ray,
With native Glory bright,
Th' unvanquish'd PITT! &mdash; his patriot Stand
Again has sav'd the sinking Land,
And ere his feeble Fabric bends to Earth,
Gives to his Country's Liberty a second Birth.

Urg'd by his strong, pathetic Voice,
Behold a Senate fir'd!
In Freedom's genial Warmth rejoice,
All-gloriously inspir'd;
Struck with the Dread of Tyrant Rule,
Each Breast impatient of Controul;
Each British Heart for Britain's Danger feel,
And in the full-throng'd House resound Repeal, Repeal.

O ever-memorable Name!
Blest patron of Mankind!
Unrivall'd still, Thy Worth shall claim,
And unremitted find,
That best Reward the World can give,
High in thy Country's Praise to live;
Dear in each Heart to hold a lasting Place,
While each successive Age, thy Name shall rise and bless.

Nor be the Muse's Register of Praise,
Too just, confin'd to One,
While Grafton, Conway, Barre's Rays
Alike conspicuous shone;
While Chesterfield and Rock'n'ham rise,
Deserving of th' immortal Prize!
While Dartmouth, Camden, aid their Country's Cause,
Secure her Liberty, and fix the tott'ring Laws.

O, Thou, whom Britons own their King,
Beneath whose gentle Sway
Freedom and Trade their Tribute bring,
And Wealth and Joy display.
Long may thy Praise each Tongue express,
Such Patriots long thy Councils bless:&mdash;
Faction thy Arm oppose!  With such at Helm,
An universal Glory gilds, O, GEORGE!  thy Realm.
