Ye lambkins that wantonly play,
Go, bleating, unfed to the fold;
You shall crop the sweet verdure of May,
When Corydon's bosom is cold.

Where yonder sad branches of Yew
Extend o'er the church-way their shade,
Yet weeping with fast-falling dew,
The ashes of Laura are laid.

Ye shepherds who hear me complain,
And blame me in grief that I pine;
Which of you can point out a swain,
Whose sorrows are equal to mine?

My Laura was blythe as the May,
She was gentle and soft as the dove;
She was innocent, tender, and gay,
And "fair as the Mother of Love."

On her cheek glow'd the roses of youth;
Yet they wither'd, alas!  in their bloom;
Her breast was the Mansion of Truth;
Yet now she lies dead in the tomb.

Sweet myrtles with woodbines I twine,
An off'ring for Laura to bring;
The rose and the lilly I join,
The innocent child'ren of spring.

The garland I wove for her head,
Where ev'ry choice flow'ret appears,
Must now on her grave-stone be spread,
And water'd with Corydon's tears.

Ye ghosts that at midnight are seen
To glide by the meteor's pale light;
Ye fairies and elves of the green,
Ye goblins and spectres of night!

Despairing while thus I complain,
Be you my companions alone!
Ah!  why am not I of your train,
Since my Joys are departed and gone?

Yes; &mdash; beneath the sad branches of Yew,
I soon with my Laura shall rest;
Then my grave shall be moisten'd with dew,
And the turf shall sit light on my breast.

Give Alexis my pipe and my crook;
For to him they alone should belong,
Who can sit all the day o'er the brook,
And rehearse his lov'd Corydon's song.

His care on the Yew-tree shall mark,
The ray which my fate shall rehearse,
And, in pity, the soft yielding bark
Shall weep as he 'graves the verse:&mdash;

Here Corydon, pride of the grove,
In one tomb with his Laura is laid:
In his death he was join'd to his love;
Oh!  pay a sad tear to his shade!

His flocks from the pastures at night,
Alexis shall drive to the fold;
He shall tend them with care and delight,
Now Corydon's bosom is cold.
