DOBBINS.
O neighbour Gubbins what a day is here?
Sure such a day I have not seen to-year!
The sun shines brighter far than he was seen
When Kate and Margery danc'd upon the green.

GUBBINS.
'Twere better for son Tom, and nephew Paul,
If Kate and Margery ne'er had danc'd at all.
Tom marry'd Kate, and Paul to Margery grew;
Kate prov'd a drunkard, Margery a shrew.
The moon would never look upon their nonsense;
She was too good a woman, on my conscience!
In the sun's face I wish she'd set her nails,
For shining upon two such draggle-tails.

DOBBINS.
Why, how now, Gubbins!  what's the matter, ho!
Did not this happen full two years ago?

GUBBINS.
It did.

DOBBINS.
Why, then, forget it.

GUBBINS.
Would I could!

DOBBINS.
You could!  why so you could then, if you would;
Forget it, then; and, now we've met together,
Let us hang case, and talk about the weather.
In his gilt coach the sun looks like a king,
And all the sky's as blue as any thing!
On Wednesday last, when I began to sow,
In my corn-fields I gibbeted a crow:
But crow and gibbet both shall rot away,
Ere we agains shall see so fine a day.

GUBBINS.
Why, neighbour Dobbins, what a rout you make?
The day looks bobbish, for a country-wake.
But one fine day, without the corn was here,
Will neither bake the bread, nor brew the beer.
Besides, fine weather does not always last;
Nor can we judge the future by the past.
For yesterday it rain'd, to my great sorrow;
And it may rain, for aught you know, to-morrow.

DOBBINS.
Full many a time, and oft, I've seen thee beat,
Because thou needs must quarrel with thy meat;
But yet, in spite of all thy blows and drubbings,
Still thou art rightly called old grumbling Gubbins.
Thou grumbledest yesterday to see it rain;
To-day thou frett'st to think it may again.
What kind of weather, pray now, goodman wizard,
Would keep thy soul from grumbling in thy gizzard?

GUBBINS.
Nay, pr'ythee, neighbour, do not flout at me;
Dost think I cannot read my A B C?
My almanack foretels wet, rainy weather,
From Sunday next, for three whole weeks together.
O!  could I see once more that glorious year,
When farmers all grew fat, and bread was dear.
Let but again such happiness be mine,
And Gubbins cares not if it rain or shine!

DOBBINS.
Well, let's to work, or else the glorious sun,
That looks so bright, will set ere we have done.

Thus Dobbins sung in panegyric vein,
And Gubbins thus in grumbletonian strain.

Now would the muse in loftier verse essay
To chaunt the glories of that radiant day;
Tell how the hair was frizz'd on Phoebus' head,
And how he rose, and how he went to bed:
But she disdains to con the lesson o'er,
That has been conn'd five thousand times before.
Nor will she ransack Italy and Greece,
And learn from thence to paint an English piece.
Like the true bard, that both with line and rule,
Striving to make his work compleat and full,
When genius flags, and fancy disappears,
Lugs in the whole creation by the ears.

Ye British "lawns," where little playful "fawns,"
Skip, bound, and amble, till the reader "yawns,"
Ye "woods" and "floods," ye "hills" and "trilling rills,"
With which our rhime and our description "fills."
Ye "vales," and "dales," that rouze the huntsman's "horn,"
When "morn" begins t' "adorn" the smiling "corn;"
Be constant ever to the poet's aid,
Nor let him have a "shade," without a "maid;"
So shall the notes re-echo thro' your "groves,"
Of gurgling turtles, and of "loving" doves:
And ev'ry poet shall in Britain draw
Such scenes as all Arcadia never saw.
