Hail, Resignation!  source of solid bliss,
And joys too great for mortal tongue to tell,
Or pencils (tho' a Raphael's) to describe:
At thy bright shrine I bow!  while my heart bleeds
And recollection traces to my view
The image of that dear, that much-lov'd woman&mdash;
I would have said my wife: &mdash; I have no wife!
The joys I felt, alas!  are no no more,
But turn'd to bitter anguish, black despair,
And deep despondency withal:  Its train,
"Of goblins, spectres, and chimeras dire."
Fell suicide, the fellest of the train,
"Grinn'd horrible a ghastly smile," to see
A wretch devoted by himself to death,
Uncall'd for by his country, or his God:
Then joyous flew, upborn by fiery dragons,
The gift of Lucifer, and from her stores
Of rankest poisons, brought the cursed juice
Of baneful Hebonah:  Then reach'd a poignard
Up to the hilt, distained and red with gore
Of self-convicted, God-abandoned nan:
Then took an halter fitter for the wretch
To Tyburn doom'd, by justice for his crimes,
Than for the woe-struck man, wishing for death,
But yet appall'd to die and quit his post,
A centinel on earth, or dare unbid
To meet his dread commander face to face.&mdash;
When suicide assum'd Compassion's garb,
And with soft sounds and seeming sympathy
Wept at his sufferings, and bid him die:
Then offered to the wretched victim's choice
The poignard, halter, or the fatal vial:
Inhuman mercy!  Joyful he accepts
The treacherous gift; thrice he lifted up
The crystal vial to his trembling lips;
Thrice the redeeming angel cry'd forbear,
Nor quit thy God, lest he abandon thee
His will be done!  whatever is, is right,
Or here or elsewhere:  Can'st thou then believe,
Thou poor desponding miserable wretch!
That he who form'd the great expanse of Heaven
By his Almighty fiat out of nothing,
Will ere afflict his creatures without cause?
O no!  Some times his prescient mercy takes
An holy child, or much beloved wife,
Deeply lamented as by thee, to bring
Thy wand'ring heart to rest on God alone,
The only rock wherein to fix thy foot.
Reflect how transient is all human gliss,
Nor ere despond for sublunary woe.
Thus spoke the angel, and with plumes display'd
Up flew to Heaven.  With amazement struck,
The self-devoted victim dropt the vial,
Resign'd, submissive to the will of God.
Then Suicide, abhorr'd by God and man,
With horrid shrieks and disappointed rage,
Yelling return'd to Hell's infernal shade,
The genuine seat of Horror and Despair.
