THYRSIS.
Why underneath this poplar's spreading shade,
Young Corydon, art thou so pensive laid?
Why shou'd that gloom thy countenance o'erspread;
And palid sadness chace thy wonted red?
What galling grief thus preys upon thy breast,
And with what wasting woe art thou oppress'd?
Say, drooping swain, thy mournful Thyrsis tell,
Reveal what racking cares thy bosom swell.

CORYDON.
O well-a-day!  kind shepherd, O forbear!
Nor urge the melancholy tale to hear.
Go, gentle Thyrsis, grace the flow'ry green,
Chearful among the jolly swains be seen.
Leave me to sigh alone, and languish here,
And press me not to tell my racking care.

THYRSIS.
Arcadian swains shall hate their tender flocks,
Delicious plains shall smile on barren rocks;
My browsing kids blue mallows shall refuse,
My sheep shall loath the dulcet morning dews;
Fierce Lybian tygers timorous fawns shall fear,
And bleating ewes their milky lambkins tear.
Nature's fix'd course shall fail e'er I will go,
Till I have heard the cause of all thy woe,
Begin, sweet Corydon, the mournful lay,
Nor shall I think it long all night to stay.

CORYDON.
Alas, e'er while, how brisk was I, and gay,
When ruddy health my visage did display!
Then to my oaten reed I tun'd my song,
And won applause from ev'ry shepherd's tongue.
Then all my sheep (now ragged) throve amain:
Unhappy flock, they mourn their master's pain.
Not driv'n to field by morn, while here I lie,
Nor pent in fold by night, they all must die.
Unhappy flock of a more luckless swain,
While he to streams and fountains mourns in vain,
Nor heeds his rural task!  Woe-worth the days
When first he did on lovely Sylvia gaze.
For him his flock, while he for Sylvia, dies!
O wide destruction of her potent eyes!
On yon tall ash I carv'd her charming name;
And in yon wood all night I sung my flame.
The live-long night I sang, and with my song,
Yon neighb'ring rocks and gloomy copses rung.
The nightingale no longer would complain,
But listen to my more lamenting strain.
The prowling wolves their horrid barkings cease,
And let the waning moon descend in peace.
O nymph!  O goddess!  save a dying swain;
Nor let me perish by thy cold disdain.
Tho' thou, my love, art white as Scythian snow,
And both thy cheeks with Tyrian crimson glow,
Pleasant and sweet as the soft western wind,
Or jessemine with blushing roses join'd.
Yet scorn me not, nor aggravate my pain,
Altho' I am an humble shepherd swain.
The time wou'd fail shou'd I essay to tell
The gods and heroes, who have deign'd to dwell,
In times of old, on blest Arcadian plains,
And on their reeds have tun'd immortal strains.
I too can trill a not untuneful lay,
If all be true my fellow-shepherds say.
And why shou'd fellow-shepherds flatter me,
Who also simple, plain, and guiltless, be?
Unfold in song great nature's laws I can,
And mighty Jove, or our Arcadian Pan,
Can raise aloft, in no unworthy verse,
And their high praise in swelling notes rehearse.
But, O!  if thou a rural life wilt brook,
And in thy hand wilt grasp the past'ral crook,
I have a harp, on which I'll fix new strings,
And play to thee ten thousand softest things.
With myrtle wreaths I'll crown thy lucid brows,
And raise thy fame next Jove's imperial spouse.
Thy shining form I'll tell to every grove,
And vocal woods shall praise my beauteous love;
Nor shall my constant heart for ever from thee rove.

THYRSIS.
O wondrous youth!  O tuneful shepherd swain,
Wou'd I cou'd praise thee in an equal strain.
Not half so sweet the artful Mopsus plays,
Tho' when he sings our flocks forget to graze.
But now you've ceas'd the melting lay to sound,
Let us arise and quit the dampy ground.
Lo!  Phoebe's silver car is wheel'd on high,
And thro' th' air the unwholesome vapours fly.
With me, dear Corydon, till morn retreat,
Tho' mean my cot, it yet is dry and sweet.
I have a beechen bowl will cheer your heart,
To see the niceness of the carver's art.
'Twas fam'd Menalla's work, he gave it me,
And for thy charming song I'll give it thee.
Nor empty that, but crown'd with dullest cream,
Delicious as the nymph you made your theme.
Nor such a song, nor such a swain was heard,
But, O!  the fatal cause is what I fear'd.
Go then, with 'swasive art, pursue the fair,
And glad success shall chase thy black despair.
Let her but hear thy notes, O Corydon!
And thou'lt revenge the ills her eyes have done;
Soft thrilling love shall in her bosom glow,
And her proud flinty heart relenting grow.
