While you, dear Sir, in Redhall's sweet Retreat,
Enjoy the Pleasures Peace and Wealth bestow,
And bid with patriot care, around you Seat,
The cherish'd Arts of Industry to grow.

Condemn'd to feel the Power of Fortune's Hate,
In vain I sigh the tedious Hour away;
Mischance, alas!  directs my wretched Fate,
To Grief and Sorrow gives my Mind a Prey.

Ye happy Days!  that once were wont to rise,
And swiftly pass, with smiling Pleasure crown'd,
Why must your Dawn be witness to my Sighs?
While Nature blooms, must I be drooping found!

No fierce Ambition then had fill'd my Soul,
No keen Misfortune pierc'd my tender Breast;
Nor stopp'd I then before I reach'd my Goal,
By Disappointment's tort'ring Pangs distrest.

Alas!  how fleeting every Bliss of Life!
How soon by Care or sad Affliction crost!
Man is but born to lead his Days in Strife,
At last o'ercome to sink &mdash; for ever lost&mdash;

&mdash;'Twas Night:  and silent Darkness veil'd the Sky,
No twinkling Star bestow'd its feeble Ray,
Soft Sleep had closed to rest the wearied Eye,
And Grief alone in musing Sadness lay.&mdash;

When lo!  appear'd before my Bed confest,
The mournful Image of my parted Friend,
Silent he stood:  at last these words addrest,
These Words that ne'er shall leave my anxious Mind.

Yet ah!  unlike the Friend that pleas'd before,
The gay Companion of my former Days;
No more his Face its kind Complacence wore,
No more we met with Friendship's warm Embrace.

His ghastly Eyes had lost their wonted Fire,
No youthful Bloom his faded Cheek display'd;
Wrapt in a mournful Shroud, the Grave's Attire,
And all the dismal Trappings of the Dead.

"Nisbet!  he said, and seiz'd my trembling Hand,
Why thus in Youth to Sorrow fall a Prey?
Now these the Dictates of your Friend attend,
His last sad Dictates do not disobey.

"No more alas!  my well-known Voice you'll hear,
Since doom'd in Death's cold Mansions to remain;
Why cloud our Meeting with that rising Tear?
Forbear your Sorrow; ah, my Friend, 'tis vain.

"Disease, you know, has cropt my early Prime,
In youthful Age consign'd me to the Tomb:
Relentless Friends!  oh, what my fatal Crime,
Thus snatch'd away in Manhood's op'ning Bloom?

"Lost in the Grave, my Name at once shall die;
No future Fame shall say Mackenzie liv'd;
The letter'd Stone its feeble Art may try,
Soon of its fading Mark by Time bereav'd.

"Ah!  what avail'd, that on my opening Mind
Beam'd all the knowledge which fair Science taught?
When once the fleeting Spirit is resign'd,
Adieu for ever each far-reaching Thought!

"To you, my Friend, I leave to speak my Praise,
To tell what, fav'ring Fate, I might have been:
And oh!  where'er your Lyre its Song shall raise,
On a dead Friend bestow one pitying Strain&mdash;

"So may your Muse enjoy the Sweets of Fame,
By Fortune favour'd, and with Pleasure blest;
May future Tongues record with Praise your Name,
While here, in dark Oblivion, I shall rest!"

Ah, why, I cry'd, thus bid my Muse aspire,
By Nature form'd for Scenes of humble Ease?
Tho' e'en my Breast should feel Ambition's Fire,
How ill my Lot with higher Thoughts agrees!

Placed on a Desert Rock, where Favour ne'er
With partial Smile shall deign to look on me:
Ah, little born for Fortune's guardian Care,
I meet, resign'd, whate'er my Fates decree&mdash;

"A Patron seek, the mournful Shade replied,
Whose gen'rous Soul may bid your Fortune rise;"&mdash;
Then cast around a parting Look &mdash; and sighed,
My feeble Arms in vain to stay him tries.
