The glowing Landscape fades; Day shuts his Eye;
Grey Twilight rests on yon high Western Hill;
While pensive, in the secret Shade I lie,
And watch the Music of the falling Rill.

The Ev'ning Star now skirts the Western Main,
Cold Drops of Dew are sprinkled o'er the Lawn;
The Rustic drives his Oxen from the Plain,
And in the Fold secures his Flocks till Dawn.

Soft dies along the Plain each ruder Breeze,
In black'ning Clouds the low'ring Whirlwinds sleep;
While gentle Gales scarce fan the waving Trees,
Or curl the Surface of the peaceful Deep.

The feather'd Choirs now cease their vocal Lay,
Nor more are heard the dewy Groves among;
All but the solemn Bird, who, from her Spray,
Chaunts to the Ear of Night her plaintive Song.

Primaeval Darkness, now, with Poppies crown'd,
O'er the dun Air her sable Mantle throws,
Diffusing universal Stillness round,
And locks a drowsy World in calm Repose.

But not so lull'd the Child of Sorrow sleeps,
Nought charms the tearful Eye of Grief to Rest;
Pale-sickly Care, his constant Vigil keeps,
No gentle Slumbers soothe his Woe-fraught Breast.

At this still Hour, the joyless Damon mourns
O'er Celia's Bier, and weeps her early Doom;
Unwilling Eccho all his Plaints returns,
Which pierce with many a Sigh the chearless Gloom.

Now from the dreary Vault pale Spectres glide,
As Stories say, to fright the wand'ring Swain,
Or dreadful stalking to the Murderer's Side,
Hang o'er his Couch, and fill his Heart with Pain.

Whilst I, still mindful of that awful Pow'r
Who guards the Just, confiding in his Aid,
Fearless, alone, or trace the secret Bow'r,
Or rove bewilder'd thro' the Moonlight Shade.

For now, far-beaming from the glowing East,
The Silver Regent of the silent Night
Slowly ascends, in mildest Radiance dress'd,
And pours o'er Woods and Streams her magic Light.

Hail awful Silence!  Contemplation hail!
Bright Emanation of celestial Fire!
All hail thy Presence!  still may'st thou prevail,
And all my Soul with Thoughts divine inspire.

To thee, while Night's dim Shades involve the Sky,
This solemn Verse, a simple Gift I bring;
'Tis thine to guide the Muse's Flight on high,
Assist her Strains, and aid her soaring Wings.
