Near fam'd Brechinia, with her spiral hills,
Which shade the sun, and terminate his rays;
Where rapid Vaga constant terror fills,
Where vale to mountain abject homage pays;
In Talgarth's vale, once fam'd for civil strife,
Where great Glendour defy'd tyrannic arms,
And, urging British freedom, lost his life,
Ere he restor'd to Wallia freedom's charms,
Liv'd artless Owen, Nature's darling child,
Who knew no ill, nor whom no vice beguil'd!

Low was his dwelling, humble was his mind,
He sought not riches, for he knew content!
His ev'ry thought to friendly views inclin'd,
To no bad purpose were his moments spent;
No sly ambition lurk'd within his soul,
Philanthropy pervaded every vein;
Corroding Envy gain'd no dire Control,
Discord forbore to enter his domain:
If happiness on mortals can descend,
'Twas here &mdash; if not &mdash; surely must truth offend!

Ere bright Aurora spread the heav'nly floor,
And strew'd her flow'rs to welcome Phoebus rise;
Ere was unbarr'd Day's high celestial door,
To spread a glitt'ring beauty thro' the skies;
Ere feather'd songsters sung their warbling notes
To charm the hollow dale with pleasing thrills;
Ere hollow bleating op'd the lambkins' throats,
Rudely responsive to the clacking mills,
Would Owen tend his sheep, and tune his reed,
Whilst echoing music harmoniz'd the mead.

How diff'rent from the pomp of guilty courts,
Where Vice and Arrogance make villains great,
Is sweet Content!  whilst, join'd with rural sports,
Felicity enjoys a safe retreat:
How blest the man, who, thus retir'd from sight,
Views venial follies in himself alone!
Not knowing ill, he needs no borrow'd light,
"Worse is an evil fame, much worse than none;"
Free both from hopes and fears, in humble state,
Unheard-of Owen sought nor love nor hate.

Near Brunlis turret Mariana liv'd,
Lovely possessor of a little farm;
Whose beauty shew'd the graces had contriv'd
To rob themselves, and give her ev'ry charm:
Tho' elegant her form, nor puff'd with pride;
She heard her praises ever with distrust;
Mean admiration always she decry'd,
And affectation but ensur'd disgust:
Her form was shap'd to bless all human-kind,
Pity such sweetness should be thus confin'd!

Oft in her arbor, when each solar ray,
Adorn'd th' expanse with fascinating beams,
Till warm'd by even of the close of day,
All nature in a silent slumber seems.
Would beauteous Mariana tune her voice
To songs of melody and Owen's strain,
While playful lambkins, skipping, would rejoice,
And bleat a rural discord on the plain.
At last seraphic love illum'd its fire,
The nymph was Owen's, Owen her desire.

Pleasing elysium!  but not long enjoy'd!
Poor Owen felt a sting, nor knew the cause;
He little thought that Cupid had annoy'd,
And now encroach'd his pow'r on nature's laws:
Yet such the case &mdash; Now Owen ceas'd his song,
Sighs he rejoin'd, and sought the murm'ring brook;
No longer pleasing tunes his pipe prolong,
But languid glances overspread each look:
If love's a gen'rous passion of the mind,
Why does it wound, and leave its sting behind!

In vain with sighs our lovers sought repose,
Love urg'd a wish &mdash; but shame forbad the plaint;
In vain each beating heart with rapture glows,
A timid nature importunes restraint.
At length resolving that no anxious care
Should grieve two lovers who deserv'd so well;
Hymen compassionating their despair,
Join'd both their hands &mdash; a virtuous parallel.
When such rewards await the worthy mind,
Who would but wish themselves of humblest kind?
