Where Rudborn's waves in clear meanders flow,
While skies reflected in its bosom glow;
Beneath a willow's solitary shade,
Two weeping virgins on its bank were laid;
And while the tears dropp'd fast from either eye,
The dimpl'd waters broke in circles by:
Well skill'd to aim the dart, or guide the car,
Their absent lovers join'd the civil war.
Where two proud houses sought Britannia's throne,
Their int'rests diff'rent, but their views were one.
While frequent sighs, the fault'ring accents broke,
To Juga thus young Eleanora spoke.

ELEANORA.
O Juga!  this my sad complaint attend,
And join in sympathy your hapless friend;
Curst be the quarrel, curst the dread alarms,
That tears Sir Robert from my constant arms,
To fight for York.  O free from every stain!
May Ebor's rose her ancient white retain:
But Fancy ranging far without controul,
With horrors worse than death o'ercomes my soul.
Methinks I see him gasping on the ground,
The life-warm blood full rushing from the wound:
Cold, pale, and weak, upon the plain he lies,
Assist him heav'n!  assist him, or he dies!

JUGA.
In sorrow's walks, and woe's deserted seats,
In pensive melancholy's dark retreats,
At morn, or eve, when chilling blasts descend,
Incessant mourners we our griefs will blend.
As wither'd oaks their frost-nip'd arms entwine,
I'll pour my tears, and thou shalt mingle thine:
Unfit for joy, like ruin'd tow'rs we'll lay,
Where oft the foot of joy was wont to stray.
Amidst whose desert walls and mould'ring cells,
Pale giant Fear, with screaming Horror dwells;
Where oft the dismal gloom of night is broke,
By boding owls, and ravens fun'ral croak.

The deep-mouth'd op'ning pack, the winding horn,
No more shall wake to joy the blushing morn:
In haunted groves I'll trace the loneliest way,
To hide my sorrows from the face of day;
Or thro' the church-way path forlorn I'll go,
With restless ghosts, companions of my woe.

When the pale moon scarce sheds her wonted light,
But faintly glimmers thro' the murky night,
Fantastic fairies from the vain array
Of happiness that flies th' approach of day:
Then if the blood of life, congeal'd and froze,
No more within Sir Robert's bosom glows,
Frantic I'll clasp his clay devoid of breath,
And racking thought shall torture worse than death.

ELEANORA.
O fairest stream!  who with thy glassy wave,
These flow'ry meads on either hand dost lave;
Perhaps with thee our champions bodies glide,
And heroes' blood augments thy fatal tide:
Perhaps &mdash; but come, my gentle Juga, haste!
Nor anxious hours in vain surmises waste:
Let's seek our heroes o'er the bloody plain,
Perhaps to meet with doubled bliss again:
If not, to them despairing let us go,
And join their shades 'midst constant ghosts below.

This said, like two fair trees whose leafy store
The east has blighted, or the lightning tore;
Or as two clouds, o'ercharg'd with wintry show'rs,
When in the sky the howling tempest low'rs,
Slowly they mov'd. &mdash; But Death's remorseless dart,
They found had pierc'd each darling hero's heart.
Distracted then, with hasty steps they go,
To where ere while they told the rage of woe:
There hand in hand they view'd the stream awhile,
Each gently sigh'd, and forc'd a parting smile:
Then plung'd beneath the stream, the parting wave
Receiv'd th' afflicted pair, and prov'd a friendly grave.
