The silent Night her sable Robe had spread,
And genial Dews from balmy Pinions shed;
When Sleep's soft God upon my Senses stole,
Unbarr'd the Prison and let loose my Soul;
To Realms unknown the sportive Wand'rer flies
And sees in Air imagin'd Regions rise.

For all in Dreams their darling Objects find,
The love-sick Maid the faithless Shepherds kind;
The weary Monarch then forgets his Throne,
The Slave his Fetters, and usurps a Crown:
Poets their own immortal Works behold,
And ravish'd Misers glitt'ring Worlds of Gold.

On Wings of Winds convey'd, methought, I stood,
Fast by the Margin of a christal Flood,
Whose floating Mirror undisturb'd by Show'rs,
Improv'd in second Beds the bord'ring Flow'rs.
Across the Waves two diff'rent Bridges lay,
To VIRTUE'S Temple This, the narrow Way;
To PLEASURES That, whose spacious Arches glow'd
With all the pictur'd Joys that Love and Wine bestow'd.

Thro' each of these the Race of Mortals past,
Few trod the first, but Numbers wore the last:
Hither promiscuous Crowds for ever throng,
The Fool, the Wit, the Aged and the Young,
The Prince, the Beggar, Sloven, and the Beau,
Lay-Elders, Priests, and sometimes Bishops too.

In that bless'd State when our first Parents stood,
E're they perceiv'd th' Antipathy to Good,
In Beds of Violets and Jess'mine Groves,
They kept glad Nuptials and unsensual Loves;
The fragrant Breath of Evening Zephyr strew'd,
Around 'em Roses which the Morn renew'd:
Without an End Joys circling Joys appear'd,
They knew no Evil, and no Danger fear'd:
One Rapture past, another came unsought,
(The good enjoy a Heav'n in ev'ry Thought.)
E'en now their Offspring had possess'd that Dow'r,
Had they but known enough to know no more.
Too soon forbidden Knowledge, prick'd within,
Their Eyes were open'd, and they saw 'twas SIN.
Banish'd from EDEN'S happy Field they go,
Thro' dreary Deserts, and thro' Hills of Snow;
No more the Gates of PARADISE are seen,
No more those Vallies of eternal Green:
The heav'nly Guards their earthly Station fled,
And wept such Tears as mournful Angels shed.

What must they do, what Refuge can they find
To ease the conscious Anguish of the Mind?
Discordant Passions rise within the Breast,
And from that Seat for ever frighted rest.
Nor did the Sentence with the Guilty end,
These Punishments from Race to Race descend;
Hence fickle Mortals cancel, or approve,
Are glad, are sorry, hate, despise, or love,
Just as those ruling Passions in their Bosoms move;
As thus, reflecting whence these Objects flow
Of unsubstantial Bliss, and real Woe;
Gazing I stood to see the motley Scene,
Prolific Fancy came and stepp'd between.
Elves, Witches, Wizards, waited at her Side,
And Daemons stalking with infernal Pride.

From her arise the Statesman's Air-built Scheme,
The Madman's Kingdom, and the Maidens dream;
The Place where Wines in copious Rivers flow,
Th' eternal Pleasures, of the Fields below;
Where Shades of am'rous Nymphs and Shepherds rove,
And Time flies gladsome on the Wings of Love.

She shews prognosticating Signs in Air,
Of armed Heroes and approaching War,
Alarms the Nurse and superstitious Crew,
With Fairies dancing round the Silver Yew,
With Moonlight Shadows seen in various Shapes,
Of frisking Goblings, and of headless Apes;
With pale-ey'd Hecate, the Midnight Queen,
And injur'd Spirits tripping o'er the Green:
With Mystic Words she wav'd a magic Wand,
A Swarm arose, and blacken'd all the Strand.
Not half so thick the Bees, when youthful Spring
Scatters fresh Odours from her balmy Wing,
Frequent the Rivers, or the woodbine Bowers,
To cull th' ambrosial Sweets of fragrant Flowers.

Behold, said she, in proper Shape you'll find
Each bodied Image of the fickle Mind;
Mirth, Love, attended by his Court of Smiles,
Maggots, gay Whims, Conceits, and wanton Wiles;
Calmness, Forbearance, and Sobriety,
Mild Temperance, and maiden Chastity;
Remorse, black Melancholy, Grief, and Care,
Envy, Rage, Malice, and resign'd Despair.
Before the Shrine of PLEASURE many bow,
A firm Allegiance some to Virtue owe;
And some to both an equal Hatred shew.
As Youth is wont, at first, I turn'd my Sight
Where PLEASURE'S Temple rear'd it's oval Height:
In Female Orders golden Columns rise
With agate Cornice, and with em'ral'd Frize;
On th' Architrave enamel'd Figures lay,
In painted Gambols naked Cupids play;
The sanguine Roofs with blazing Rubies glow,
The Topaz casts it's golden Light below;
Impending Festoons trembled over Head,
And over-ripen'd Leaves the blushing Roses shed.

Within, on downy Beds, the Goddess sat,
Soft easy Laughs and Graces round her wait;
Mirth free from present Care of what may be
The Consequence of dark Futurity:
The little Loves before her Presence flew,
And ev'ry Charm of Venus' Laughter loving Crew.

Prudence or sour Restriction ne'er appears,
Nor rigid Wisdom silver'd o'er with Years;
Reflection, Foresight, Thought are banish'd hence,
Foes to the jovial Family of Sense.
Here Lust attends a Woman to the Waist
Of blooming Beauty, but a Goat the rest;
Her Blood for ever boils with inward Fires,
And from her Eyes dart forth obscene Desires;
Lodg'd on her Neck unfinish'd Reptiles creep,
And slimy Newts their Propagation keep;
In close Embrace dissolving Lizards lie,
And Sparrows melt away in am'rous Extasy.

Next Love, the falsest Passion of the Mind,
Approach'd with easy Mien, and Looks resign'd;
On silken Cords a golden Quiver hung,
The Arrows fast'ned, and the Bow unstrung;
His golden Locks in waving Rings behind
Fell loosely down, and floated to the Wind;
His Wings around ambrosial Odours threw,
And fann'd each sportive Zephyr as it blew.

As soon as e'er the cunning Urchin saw
My Thoughts and Looks obedient to his Law;
That Paradise which in his Face he bore,
If ever pleasing Smiles, was seen no more,
He lays the Infant by, and shews the Tyrant's Pow'r.
As o'er the Seas when Western Breezes blow,
And ev'ry Storm is lodg'd in Caves below,
No rising Waves upon the Surface flow.
In hollow Shells th' unactive Tritons sleep,
And brooding Halcyons tempts us to the Deep.
When once we venture, Shades with Horror crown'd,
Cast on th' expanse their Dusky Mantles round;
Forth from their Beds the blust'ring Winds arise,
And bursting Clouds fly thund'ring thro' the Skies.
Thus Love to Art and Mischief ever giv'n,
Assum'd the sweet Simplicity of Heav'n;
But soon away that Mask of Mildness threw,
Streight to the Point a feather'd Shaft he drew;
Aim'd at my Heart th' unerring Message flew.
I felt a sudden Change, a thrilling Fire
Ran thro' my Veins, and caus'd a strange Desire;
I wish'd, I knew not what, yet still wish'd on,
A Case by many felt, express'd by none.
As the poor stricken Deer outflies the Wind,
And leaves her native Haunts and Woods behind,
I fled to ease my Smart, but fled in vain;
Deep in my Breast the fatal Wounds remain,
And still in ev'ry Place renew my Pain.

I stopp'd, but whilst I turn'd with longing Eyes,
And doubtful Conflicts in my Bosom rise;
I saw an Angel, Messenger of Jove,
Shoot on the Sun Beams from the Vault above:
Truth she was call'd, and once ador'd on Earth,
In golden Days when Men distinguish'd Worth;
In after-times, when all to Vice were giv'n,
She left th' ungrateful World, and fled to Heav'n.

Rash Youth, said she, avoid that soft Disgrace,
Nor court Destruction with a fond Embrace;
For nothing there but Mists of Error rise,
Obstruct the Judgment and delude the Eyes,
With fleeting Scenes of visionary Joys.
Let me, unerring Guide, direct your Way,
Youth longs as much, when such entice to stray,
To be betray'd, as Pleasure to betray.
I'll shew you there what Millions are undone;
For all, who thro' the Course of Life must run,
Should see those Dangers, which they ought to shun.
Diseases black in flow'ry Ambush lie,
And all who taste the pleasing Poisons die.

My sacred touch no lurking Falshood bears,
Nor safely mask'd an Angels likeness wears,
But quick in it's own proper Shape appears.
She touch'd the Gates; the spacious Temple falls,
An hideous Length was seen of ruin'd Walls;
Large tow'ring Alders cast a Noon-Day Night,
To guard the horrid Plains from mortal Sight;
Lethargick Streams with Stygian horror flow,
And round the Borders Roots of Hemlock grow:
Impending Rocks deform'd with thousand Holes,
Afford dark Nests to Adders and to Owls;
Beneath the Covert of a blasted Oak,
Their frightful Auguries hoarse Ravens croak;
And Birds obscene and Batts with dismal cry,
The Ears of ghastly Goblins gratify.

Thus in Romance enchanted Castles rise
Whose lofty Columns seem to prop the Skies;
Attendant Imps in gaudy Shapes dispense
Extatick Joys to satiate ev'ry Sense;
The Charm is broke, let but the Knight appear,
And all the bright Creation turns to Air.

The Goddess once, that look'd so gay and free,
Became a filthy Hagg, Debauchery.
Close at her side reclin'd, her daughter Pain
Bemoans her Mother's past Offence in vain;
Th' uneasy Posture, and uplifted Eyes,
Short broken Sobs, and interrupted Sighs,
The frequent Twitch, and meager Aspect shew,
A sad variety of inward Woe.
Groaning she lay upon a thorny Bed,
Gout at her Feet, and Fever at her Head:
Here stood Consumption, like a slighted Maid
By faithless Vows of artful Man betray'd;
The blasted Lilly fades o'er all her Face,
The drooping Roses die with pale Disgrace:
There Lethargy, on silken Pallets lay,
And sleeps the Weeks, and Months, and Years away;
Alternately she gapes, and snores, and nodds,
And talks in sickly Dreams with airy Gods:
A thousand more Distempers ever roam,
Untimely leading Mortals to th' eternal Home.

My kind Conductress took my trembling Hand,
And safely led me thro' th' infected Band,
To where bright VIRTUE'S sacred Altars stand:
Trophies not like the first, this Court adorn
The Shield of Pallas, and Diana's Horn;
High on a Pinacle of Brass above,
Sat perch'd the Thunder-bearing Bird of Jove;
Spears, Bucklers, Swords, in diff'rent Forms appear,
And Arms devoted to the God of War:
A venerable Tribe of Greece and Rome,
Start from the Wall, and animate the Dome.
In breathing Sculpture first the Warriors frown,
And each by some immortal Deed is known:
With Anguish arm'd Achilles seeks the Plain,
And breaths Revenge for dear Patroclus slain;
A Host around him stands in close Array,
He spurns, he foams, his Bosom swells with Ire,
His rolling Eye-balls dart a painted Fire.
On half rais'd Tablets infant Marses sat,
Weeping unhappy Philopoemen's Fate:
Victorious Crowns Epaminodas wears,
And by her fav'rite Pallas self appears:
Themistocles, the Persians Terror stood,
Next Aristides, justly named the Good.
Superiour of the Romans, Julius shone,
As o'er th' inferiour Stars, the peerless Moon;
In golden Characters beneath his Name
These Words were seen, I WENT, SAW, OVERCAME.
'Twas he who conquer'd Gaul, th' Atlantick Main
Echo'd the increasing Thunder back again;
Fame flew before him Messenger of War,
And wide Euphrates trembled from afar.
The Patriots next, (how few since them have shone!)
Who for their Country liv'd, and fell alone.
Cato and Phocion Hand in Hand appear,
And e'en in Stone their usual Aspects wear;
True to their Trust the Stones their Charge maintain,
They seem to wish to live, only to dye again.
Thermopylae's great Leader stood confess'd,
With all the Courage of his Gransire bless'd;
The Spartan Genius hovers o'er his Head,
Who view'd with Joy, her dearest Children dead.
Curtius not less inspir'd with publick Good,
Braves the wide Torrent of the fatal Flood:
And Regulus with Freedom's Cap adorn'd,
Midst Carthage' Walls to certain Death return'd;
Where Pity ne'er her turtle Pinions spread,
Nor on their Hearts her melting Influence shed.

Next these, much greater Laurels crown'd their Busts,
Who quell'd their Passions, and o'ercame their Lusts.
First Socrates, in thinking Posture sat,
The Shame and Glory of th' Athenian State;
Philosophy bemoans her darling Son,
And down her Cheeks, slow drop the Tears of Stone.
Surrounded by a Consul's Guard, I view'd
Young Gen'ral Scipio, who, himself subdu'd;
A Conquest truly great, 'tis few who can
Govern this little stubborn Empire, Man.
The Martyr CHARLES receives a Crown on high,
Borne on the Wings of Cherubs to the Sky;
Chain'd to a Rock beneath pale Envy howls,
And Zelota with Disappointment growls.
Pardon, great Shade, that Wreaths so mean as mine
Are needless cast to wither on thy Shrine;
On ev'ry Wave tho' Neptune rules as King,
He takes the Tribute of the smallest Spring.
VIRTUE herself refulgently appear'd,
High on a Throne of polish'd Ivry rear'd;
With native Light her awful Visage shone,
Bright as the Rays of the Meridian Sun,
Yet mild as glim'rings of the silver Moon;
E'en Vice itself her beauteous Form approv'd,
For to be seen alone will make her be belov'd.
Reason upheld the Seat with decent State,
Tho' meek, yet strong, tho' condescending, great;
Her looks, tho' strict, yet mild, tho' grave, not old,
Grand without Pride, and without Rashness bold:
O'er her Precaution stretch'd her ample Shield,
And hoodwink'd Justice equal Ballance held.
Religion, cloath'd in Stole of Sable grain,
Flowing behind with venerable Train,
Here keeps her Fires; whose Fervour ne'er decays,
But still grows purer by a length of Days.
Sudden, methought, the Goddess struck the Ground,
An universal Silence reign'd around;
She rose and spoke, enraptur'd Angels hung
On the sweet Accents of her heavenly Tongue;
Grace, Innocence, and Truth their Pow'rs combine,
And ev'ry Word flows forth with Harmony divine.
Mortal, said she, since thou observ'st my Way,
Ask what you will, in vain thou shalt not pray,
For hence none unrewarded goes away.
This Path, said I, without Design I trod,
For sure Reward enough, 'tis to be good;
But if kind Goddess, thou wilt give a Dow'r,
Grant this Request, and I will ask no more.
As Life's thin Sand quick hurries thro' the Glass,
And unobserv'd the fleeting Minutes pass;
O let my Youth, while Youth remains, be spent,
In ev'ry Scene, tho' gay, yet innocent;
Justly to act thro' each, what all commend,
The honest Man, and the well-natur'd Friend:
Not over careless, and not over nice,
Patient alike to give or ask Advice;
From Malice free, obliging always seen;
Yet not so far conceding to be mean:
To have the Praise, to hate the Lust of Fame;
To merit Glory, yet reject the Name;
Not pinch'd by Want, nor curs'd with too much Pow'r;
Behind the Richest, but before the Poor;
Unknown, yet useful, to my Country live,
Nor envy Honours that I can't receive:
And when old Age, with grey Experience crown'd,
(The Passions vanquish'd, and the Judgment sound,)
Exerts that dear Employment of Threescore,
To count each Folly, or well doing o'er;
Pleas'd to behold with retrospective Eye,
My Part thus acted, it must end with Joy.

Nought interrupts the Bliss of virtuous Souls,
No Fear alarms, no guilty Conscience howls;
The Thoughts of Death, a pleasing Comfort give,
They needs must wish it, who but dye to live.

About to leave this odious Land of Life,
So full of Trouble, Sorrow, Care and Strife,
I ne'er shall cast reluctant looks behind,
But willingly obey the friendly Wind,
That blows my Vessel to that spacious Sea,
Where one time all must sail Eternity;
Whose Waves for ever roll without a Shore,
And those who once embark return no more.
