Ye Winds to whom Collin complains
In Ditties so sad and so sweet,
Believe me, the Shepherd but fains
He's wretched, to shew he has Wit.
No Charmer like Collin can move,
And this is some pretty new Art;
Ah!  Collin's a Jugler in Love,
And likes to play Tricks with my Heart.

When he will, he can sigh and look pale,
Seem doleful and alter his Face,
Can tremble and alter his Tale;
Ah!  Collin has every Pace:
The Willow my Rover prefers
To the Breast, where he once beg'd to lie
And the Stream, that he swells with his Tears,
Are Rivals belov'd more than I.

His Head my fond Bosom would bear,
And my Heart would soon beat him to Rest;
Let the Swain that is slighted despair,
But Collin is only in jest.
No Death the Deceiver designs,
Let the Maid that is ruin'd despair;
For Collin but dies in his Lines,
And gives himself that Modish Air.

Can Shepherds, bred far from the Court,
So wittily talk of their Flame?
But Collin make Passion his Sport,
Beware of so fatal a Game:
My Voice of no Musick can boast,
Nor my Person of ought that is fine;
But Collin may find, to his Cost,
A Face that is fairer than mine.

Ah!  then I will break my lov'd Crook,
To Thee I'll bequeath all my Sheep,
And die in the much-favour'd Brook,
Where Collin does now sit and weep:
Then mourn the sad Fate that you gave,
In Sonnets so smooth and divine;
Perhaps, I may rise from my Grave
To hear such soft Musick as thine.

Of the Violet, Dasie, and Rose,
The Hearts-Ease, the Lilly, and Pink,
Did thy Fingers a Garland compose,
And crown'd with the Rivulets Brink;
How oft, my dear Swain, did I swear,
How much my fond Love did admire
Thy Verses, thy Shape, and thy Air,
Tho' deckt in thy rural Attire?

Your Sheep-hook you rul'd with such Art,
That all your small Subjects obey'd;
And still you reign'd King of this Heart,
Whose Passion you falsly upbraid;
How often, my Swain, have I said,
Thy Arms are a Palace to me,
And how well I would live in a Shade,
Tho' adorned with nothing but thee.

Oh!  what are the Sparks of the Town,
Tho' never so fine and so gay?
I freely would leave Beds of Down,
For thy Breast on a Bed of new Hay:
Then, Collin, return once again,
Again make me happy in Love,
Let me find thee a faithful true Swain,
And as constant a Nymph I will prove.
