'Twas at the Tavern feast for Gallia freed
From tyrants of proud Bourbon's breed,
Aloft in priestly state,
The Reverend Chairmen sate,
In bold republican debate:
His roaring blades were pledging round
Their toasts, in brimming bumpers crown'd;
So should the friends of anarchy be found.
The learned Catherine by his side,
Like Hogarth's antiquated bride,
Sate blooming fair in climacteric pride.
Happy, happy, happy pair,
None but the slave,
None but the slave,
None but the slave would sculk the chair.

The Secretary placed aloof,
Amid the table's roar,
Essays to mumble the dull minutes o'er,
When "hear him, hear him!"  rends the roof,
And shakes the trembling floor.

The great Nassau their first applause they show'r,
Who left his native fens in happy hour;
His love of empire such, so vast ambition's power!
The patriot's masque conceal'd the Monarch's frown;
Sublime he shone with Britain's radiant crown;
When he the Royal Mary prest,
And stampt himself a King, a Sovereign confest.

The Revolution toast goes round,
William and Liberty!  the glorious sound,&mdash;
William and Liberty!  the Tavern roofs rebound.
With ravish'd ears
The Doctor hears,
Apes Cromwell's nod,
Assumes the rod,
And seems to scourge the Peers.

The praise of brave Fayette the bawling Club then sing,
Fayette the gallant, gay, and young;
With heads on poles the hero comes,
Sound out his triumphs, beat the drums!
Flusht with a purple grace,
He shews his blood-besprinkled face.
Now give the Fish-wives breath &mdash; he comes, he comes!
Fayette the gallant, gay and young,
Murdering mobs did first convoke;
Fayette's frolicks are a treasure,
Murdering is the coward's pleasure,
Rich the treasure,
Sweet the pleasure,
Sweet the life-destroying stroke.

Sooth'd with the song, the priest grew vain,
And conn'd his sermon o'er again,
And thrice three cheers decreed, and thrice encor'd the strain.
A sober guest saw faction rise
And madden in his fiery eyes;
And whilst the Church and King defied,
Chang'd the theme and check'd his pride:
He drew a scene of civil rage,
Describ'd in Burke's emphatic page.
He painted Lewis meek and mild,
By too severe a fate
Fall'n, fall'n, fall'n, fall'n,
Fall'n from his high estate,
Despoil'd, dethron'd, revil'd.

A captive King, in triumph led,
By slaves his former bounty fed;
On the bare earth at Faction's Altar kneels,
And with an oath his own destruction feels,
With downcast eyes the joyless Doctor sate,
Revolving in his gloomy soul,
The sudden turns and quirks of Fate;
And now and then a sigh broke loose,
To think how soon some necks might fit a hangman's noose.

The Toast-master now smil'd to see,
That Love was in the next degree;
'Twas but a hint the glass to move,
For Wine inspires the heart with love.
Soon he gave, in copious measure,
"Days of ease and Nights of pleasure!"
Politics are toil and trouble,
Preaching but a hubble-bubble;
Never ending, still beginning,
Saying still, and still unsaying;
If the text be worth thy spinning,
Think, Oh think it worth obeying.

See the bottle stands beside thee,
Pledge the Toast the Club provides thee;
The Roarers rend the roof with loud applause,
Faction was crown'd, but Drinking won the cause.
The Priest, unwilling to disgrace his Gown,
Gaz'd at the Glass,
He wish'd to pass,
And gaz'd and gulpt, &mdash; gaz'd and gulpt,
Gaz'd and gulpt, and gulpt it down.
At length with sleep and wine at once oppress'd,
Fell backward in his chair, and sunk to rest.

Now charge again your glasses full,
A stouter yet, and yet a stouter pull;
Break the bands of sleep asunder,
And rattle in his ears with lungs of thunder.
Hark, hark!  the horrid din
Has rais'd up his chin,
As awak'd from a stound,
Amaz'd he gapes and stares around,
Bastile, Bastile!  the Club in chorus cries;
See all PARIS arise;
See the firebrands they rear,
How they hiss in the air,
And the sparkles flash up to the skies!
Behold a ghastly band
Of prisoners, where they stand;
These are wretches that in dungeons were found,
And, in chains of iron bound,
Were buried under ground;
Give the vengeance due
To the mournful crew.

Behold how they wave their fetters on high,
How they point to the tyrannous cells,
And dismal caverns, where Oppression dwells.
The Insurgents applaud with a furious joy,
And Fayette seiz'd a pick axe with zeal to destroy.
A Trooper led the way,
To guide him to his prey,
And like another Sinon, sack'd another Troy.

Thus some few years ago,
Ere Frenchmen learnt to pull down Kings,
While Paris Mobs were harmless things,
G&mdash; with head unsound
Could spread destruction round,
Strip Mansfield's house, and level Newgate to the ground.

When Burke at length, sublime reformer, came,
Supporter of his country's fame;
The sweet philanthropist from Wisdom's store,
Enlarg'd our reason's narrow bounds,
And added sense to solemn sounds.
With nature's mother wit, with powers unknown before,
Let elder Brutus yield the prize,
Or both divide the Crown;
Brutus bade Liberty arise,
BURKE argued Faction down.
