O COMMERCE!  sprung from liberty and peace,
O animate these strains, which now the Muse
Attempts with trembling wing;
Though weak the string and nerve.

My Muse unfledg'd, attempts to take her flight:
The theme allures, but reason dreads the height;
One spark, 'tis all I ask,
Of Gray's or Barbauld's fire.

In those fierce times, ere Art had chose her 'bode,
COMMERCE was then despis'd in Britain's isle;
In other climes she dwelt
With eager rapture sought.

Venice and Spain her kindling blessings shar'd,
But other views engag'd Britannia's sons;
Strong, bold, in manners rude,
Arms were their only joy.

Despotic Barons lorded o'er her lands,
And slaves obsequious to their dire command,
At the shrill clarion's sound
Assembling left their flocks.

Discord and civil broil diffus'd their rage,
The thirst of glory rous'd their souls to war;
Ambition stalk'd around,
And seeking honor &mdash; fell&mdash;

Th' effects were dire, though conquest crown'd their arms,
Horror and carnage were the sure event&mdash;
The captive Monarch fell
A prey to perjur'd foes.

Such scenes of woe with pity Peace beheld,
And strait this mandate to her daughter gave:
"Thou friend to Liberty,
Each art and science bring!

"For now the earth with desolation's spread;
Ill-judging man to till his land disdains,
Charm'd with the clang of arms,
He social life deserts:

"Their manners soften, and their thoughts refine;
Unlock the springs of Learning's sacred fount,
Receive my Olive-branch,
To bless the favour'd Isle."

Her daughter soon the grateful task began,
And sent an Arthur to reform mankind;
A virgin Queen she chose,
And Brunswick's royal line,

To raise the fame of Britain's hardy race,
And check the pride of Bourbon's haughty Kings,
Her naval pow'rs remain
Firm as strong Calpe's rock;

Edward and Henry may their laurels claim
From France by slaughter and ambition gain'd;
Their deeds with wonder read,
May grace the historic page.

Anson, Drake, and Cook superior rise,
Whose fame let ev'ry friend to Britain tell,
For ev'ry zone and pole
Their glorious acts proclaim.

Their works not transient, but for ever last,
From the new Western World and Friendly Isles,
More solid honour gain'd
Than all fam'd Cressy's fight.
