Ye men whose breasts with generous ardour burn,
Who feel the grateful drops of Pity's dew,
Whose noble minds usurp'd oppressions spurn,
Approach, and take one transient mournful view.

The dying pangs of injur'd Virtue hear,
The social calls of modest Worth attend;
A martyr's cause, demands one pitying tear,
And Justice hails you as her guardian friend.

Clear the reproaches of a sully'd name;
The woes of bleeding Memory renew;
A Sov'reign's wrongs, unfeign'd compassion claim,
A royal victim bids the world adieu.

See, in a solitary cell confin'd,
Th' ill-fated Prince, a lowly suppliant bends;
Unjustly doom'd, an outcast to mankind,
Deny'd the balmy comfort of his friends.

The fond endearments of connubial love,
The soothing mildness of parental care;
This last resource, he was deny'd to prove,
Alone, unpity'd, every evil bear.

Thus from th' ungrateful world too soon retir'd,
From scornful tyrants, he to Heaven appeals;
His mind with fervent Constancy inspir'd,
While pure Devotion all his sorrows heals.

And can there be a more delightful joy,
A nobler comfort, or a purer bliss,
The lingering moments of our lives t' employ,
In tracing our immortal happiness?

When doom'd to misery, oppressed with woes,
By friends forsaken, or to foes betray'd;
What balmy solace from Religion flows,
What resignation she brings to our aid.

She fires the mind with Hope's enlivening rays,
The heart with Fortitude, and pious Trust;
Th' extatic bliss that conscious Worth displays,
In the applause of all the good and just.

Such was the sufferer of this mournful scene,
Soon as he knew his dire portending fate;
With mild benignity, and air serene,
He shines conspicuous, eminently great.

To see a virtuous Monarch doomed to die,
Once the fond object of his people's love;
Forbid it Justice!  and Humanity!
The crime that savages would disapprove.

Too true, alas!  the die's for ever cast,
The dreadful summons awfully appears,
The fatal moment now approaches fast,
The thirst for blood salutes his dying ears.

No power can change th' irrevocable doom,
The short relapse employ'd in fervent prayer;
And now the yawning and unsated tomb,
Receives the fatal object of its care.

The virtuous Prince now summon'd to his side,
To chase the terrors of the solemn scene;
His only hopes, his only joy, and pride,
His lovely offspring, and unhappy Queen.

She long to misery a prey,
Depriv'd of every worldly social tye;
Bereft of friends, the light of cheering day,
Torn from her husband and her family.

All hopes of happiness from her had flown,
The sad companions of her hours forlorn;
Were from her side into a prison thrown,
There basely murdered in their early morn.

Her husband now the partner of her grief,
Once the companion of her happier days;
Seeks in his murderers hands his sole relief,
And sighs in triumph his Creator's praise.

Their infant offspring, pledges of their love!
To each, by Nature's strongest ties ally'd,
In silent sadness melancholy rove,
And all their sorrows tenderly divide.

Oh!  how can I this moving scene describe,
How ponder on the embrace, and last farewell?
The cruel agonies of love imbibe,
The claims of nature and affection tell?

The warm effusions of each faithful heart,
Struggling with grief, while holding all most dear,
Whom fate so soon condemns for e'er to part,
While resolution checks the rising tear.

Now with the measure of their woes oppress'd,
They sink forlorn into each others arms;
In silent agony now stand confess'd,
Till cruel thought their fortitude disarms.

This interval elapsed, one last farewell,
Each other's bosom they with tears bedew,
Till the sad summons, and the tolling bell,
'Twas then for ever from their last adieu.

Th' unhappy Monarch now his trials o'er,
Calmly serene the dreadful fate attends;
While angels voices, all his thoughts restore,
And Revelation all his views extends.

This teaches him to look beyond the grave,
For calm Content, and Virtue's bright rewards,
The shocks of frail mortality to brave,
While there's a Being that his spirit guards.

Now to the fatal spot at length come nigh,
He mounts the scaffold with an air compos'd,
Surveys the engine with a tranquil eye,
Then, in the silent arms of death repos'd.

You who from dear experience often range,
To trace the wild ideas of liberty,
Will find in theory a poor exchange,
Excess of freedom is but tyranny.

Behold a state puff'd up with outward shew,
Pleas'd with the phantom of a sounding name,
Which like the sun, as it dissolves the snow,
Is soon extinguish'd in Rebellion's flame.

Behold a race who boast of Freedom's laws,
Condemn their Sov'reign to an early grave;
A direful victim to Oppression's cause,
Whom not the rights of Justice e'en could save.

Are these the pure effects of Freedom's fire?
Are these the joys her happy isle await?
If so, a monarchy I most admire,
And let that monarchy be England's state.

There Freedom glows in all her native pride,
There Justice sanctions what the law defines,
While Peace and Plenty every where preside,
And soft Humanity resplendent shines.

The peasant happy in his chearful gains,
Secure enjoys his quiet, frugal meal;
While the rich landlords in their large domains,
To all alike their benefactions deal.

There a great King, by all his people lov'd,
Of every earthly happiness possess'd;
Fear'd by the wise, and by the good approv'd,
He reigns with honour, and with virtue bless'd.

In his fine offspring all alike combin'd,
The royal, with the fond endearing ties;
The graces, with the beauties of the mind,
And with their Sov'reign's love, their country's prize.

A Constitution, that has long withstood,
The work of ages, and the wreck of times;
From which does flow such universal good,
As ne'er is met with in remoter climes.

This legacy our ancestors bequeath'd,
For this they nobly toil'd, they nobly fought;
Till unimpair'd, their gallant swords they sheath'd,
And left their sons to prove the good they'd wrought.

And shall we basely sully their bright fame?
Shall we disgrace their meritorious deeds?
Or brand their honour, stigmatize their fame,
By sowing civil Discord's envious seeds.

No, let us doubly this great trust cement,
Revere their actions, and their virtues prize;
Learn to be happy, peaceful and content,
By merit only, to bright honours rise.

Oh!  may no factious discords here prevail,
No secret spy, no undesigning hand,
No blind fanaticks, or base knaves assail,
This happy country, and this peaceful land!

Fatal Experience, has too lately shewn,
The miseries that every clime await,
When Unanimity from it has flown,
And Sans Cullottes decide their country's fate.

The dire misfortunes of tyrannic power,
The kindling flames of sad intestine broils,
Heaven now in justice on the French do shower,
And thus their cruelty on them recoils.

Then let us from this awful lesson learn,
To trace the hypocrite's deceitful smiles.
The snares of theory with horror spurn,
And shun the speculator's artful wiles.

By such a conduct we shall e'er secure,
Our country's honour, glory, and renown;
By this the miseries of wars indure,
And happiness with wealth and commerce crown.
