Be still, my spirits! &mdash; while along the waste
Of mimic grandeur, musing sad I stray:&mdash;
What silence reigns amid the realms of taste,
Which lately echoed to MARCHESI'S lay!

A season hence &mdash; here VESTRIS shew'd his face,
Perpetual-grinning, like a comic mask;
Here rose his crest, array'd in plumy grace,
Here twirl'd his heel &mdash; to twirl no easy task.

The fabric's gone! &mdash; By boree, or brisee,
With HILLISBERG, here he'll delight no more:
Nor ROSSI'S brisk fandango lead astray,
And make us sin in wishes, o'er and o'er!

More distant names, too, on the mem'ry dwell,
HEINEL &mdash; BACCELLI, and the vocal prime,
GUADAGNI, MELLICO, and GABRIELL&mdash;
And scores besides, who ravish'd for a time!

Honours more recent &mdash; here the GUIMARD drew
Her Pas de Russe &mdash; her grace-convulsion'd arms!
Scarce need MEDEA'S bath her youth renew,
Who thus can conquer by Vertumnian charms!

The tott'ring boxes where the simp'ring dame,
And dashing spark, a tete-a-tete enjoy'd&mdash;
Fanning by turns the hidden am'rous flame,
By flames more ravaging are now destroy'd!

Each gay "coup d'oeil," a dreary scene appears,
"No vistos strike, no palaces surprise:"
The Deep no more his surge terrific rears;
No more the Alps in distant grandeur rise!

Where are those planish'd streams, those fountains bright,
So sparkling and so cooling to the eye,
Where the NOVERBIANS tript with foot so light?
Alas!  those streams &mdash; those fountains are burnt dry!

How have I mark'd the jocund merry tribe,
Rouged up to innocence and rustic blush;
By smile mechanic give the past'ral gibe,
And spring like whirring covies on a flush!

The desolation of their feckless plain,
Each prospect of the hopeful season damps:&mdash;
When will ye, O ye festive groups, again
Bask in the chearing beams of patent lamps?

The coffee-room! &mdash; where now its gay parade!
The Bar, and all its pride, in ruin lies!
No fragrant Tea, Orgeat, Ice, Lemonade;
Nor Orange Chips, nor curious Confects rise!

Yet oft I've seen, in this regretted space,
Fair DEVON, arm'd with more than earthly bloom!
RUTLAND has too display'd each mortal grace&mdash;
A Star emerging from a mourner's gloom!

Those joys are past; and o'er the ravag'd pile,
E'en Scandal droops, who ne'er yet frailty mist;
Never yet fail'd a virtue to revile!
And who, while whisp'ring &mdash; cries "list, list, O list!"

Her tale still follow'd when the curtain fell:&mdash;
'Twas the cantabile that clos'd the song:
Adown Fops-Alley, how her notes would swell,
United to a chorus by the throng!

&mdash;Favour'd Triumvirate! &mdash; of Paean-race,
CRAMER, MAZZINGHI, and CERVETTO, nam'd;
For fiddle, harpsichord, and viol-bass,
Alike by Princes and Plebeians fam'd!

To that same Bar, ye oft have slily stole,
Where WILDER &mdash; beyond compass form'd to bless&mdash;
Has anxiously supplied the genial bowl,
And bid ye ev'ry one &mdash; in her Recess!

All now is still! &mdash; Tho' twelve o'clock approach,
No call is heard, impatient of delay,
Of "Order instantly her Grace's coach!"
Or &mdash; "Lady Splendour's chariot stops the way!"

From this devoted fabric, learn, ye Fair,
&mdash;Muses to Poets, themes for highest praise&mdash;
That Mischiefs lurk where Pleasure spreads her snare,
And that you sometimes perish, while you BLAZE!
