What means, honest Shepherd, this Cloud on thy Brow,
Say, Where is thy Mirth and thy Melody now?
Thy Pipe thrown aside, and thy Looks full of Thought,
As silent and sad as a Bird newly caught:
Has any Misfortune befallen thy Flocks,
Some Lamb been betrayed by the Craft of the Fox:
Or Murrain, more fatal, just seiz'd on thy Herd;
Or has thy dear Phyllis let slip a cross Word?

The Season indeed may to Musing incline,
Now that grey-bearded Winter makes Autumn resign;
The Hills all around us their Russet put on,
And the Skies seem in Mourning for Loss of the Sun;
The Winds make the Tree, where thou sitt'st, shake its Head;
Yet tho' with dry Leaves Mother Earth's Lap is spread,
Her Bosom, to cheer us, is verdant with Wheat;
And the Woods can supply us with Pastime and Meat.

O!  No, says the Shepherd, I mourn none of these,
Content with such Changes as Heaven shall please,
Tho' now we have got the wrong Side of the Year,
'Twill turn up again, and fresh Beauties appear;
But the Loss that I grieve for, no Time can restore;
Our Master that lov'd us so well is now more;
That Oak which we hop'd wou'd long shelter us all
Is fallen; then well may we shake at its fall.

Where find we a Pastor so kind, and so good,
So careful to feed us with wholesomest Food,
To watch for our Safety and drive far away,
The sly prouling Fox that would make us his Prey:
O!  may his Remembrance for ever remain,
To shame these hard Shepherds who, mindful of Gain,
Only look at their Sheep with an Eye to the Fleece,
And watch 'em but so as the Fox watch'd the Geese.

Whom now shall I choose for the Theme of my Song?
Or must my poor Pipe on the Willow be hung?
No more to commend that Good-nature and Sense,
Which always cou'd please, but ne'er once gave Offence.
What Honour directed he firmly pursu'd,
Yet would not his Judgment on others intrude;
Still ready to help with his Service and Vote,
But ne'er to thrust Oar in another Man's Boat.

No more, honest Shepherd, these Sorrows resound,
The Virtues thou praisest, so hard to be found,
Are yet not all fled, for the Swain who succeeds
To his Fields and his Herds, is true Heir to his Deeds;
His Pattern he'll follow, his Gentleness use,
Take Care of the Shepherds, and cherish the Muse;
Then cease for the Dead thy impertinent Care,
Rejoice, he survives in his Brother and Heir.
