Now, Time, rejoice!  round sorrow twist thy chain!
For thou art young, thou art new-born again.
Bid ev'ry deep mouth'd cannon roar,
And wake to mirth the sleeping store,
And let the shrill-tongu'd trumpet's note
On echo's airy bosom float.
To bless and to adorn the infant year,
Bring in the van brisk health, and riches in the rear.

Tho' death has laid thy mighty monarch low,
And swell'd the tide of universal woe,
Yet cease, ah!  cease to mourn, for all
Must wait the tyrant's final call.
There's no reversing his decree
For he shall vanquish even thee.
Behold another George ascends the throne,
Who, like his sire, shall reign unrivall'd and alone.

Thus, when by heaven's unalterable laws
The pale-ey'd star of eve its flame withdraws,
Succeeds a space of gloomy night,
And nature weeps the loss of light,
She droops her dark-bound front awhile,
But soon renews her lovely smile;
When Heos chases ev'ry tear away,
Throws night behind his orb, and dawns the coming day.

Tell me, prophetic Time!  I sue to thee;
And tho' a Briton, bend my pliant knee.
To rise I never will presume,
Till thou hast spoke my country's doom.
"Shall triumph-looking peace again
Direct her dove to Albion's plain.
And where abroad the cypress rears its head,
Say!  shall she plant the blooming olive in its stead?

"Say, shall my Prince, who now the sceptre wields,
Restore the harvest to Germania's fields!
Shall he chastise fierce Gallia's pride,
And bid her insolence subside;
And on some future, happy day,
Wipe every orphan's tear away,
Unlock the urn, where Plenty keeps her store,
And bid united legions rest, and war no more."

"It shall be so, 'thou say'st', it shall be so,
Nor need thy country dread th' invading foe;
For chid by thy new Monarch, now
Old Mars himself to him shall bow.
Peace, with her gentle dove, again
Shall settle on BRITANNIA'S plain;
And where abroad the cypress rears its head,
She there shall plant the blooming olive in its stead.

"Thy native Prince, who now the sceptre wields,
Shall pour the harvest o'er Germania's fields,
The rage of Gallia shall deride,
And clip the pinions of her pride;
He soon too, on some happy day,
Shall wipe each orphan's tear away;
Ope wide the urn where Plenty locks her store;
Bid Freedom soar aloft, and nations war no more."

Britons, one and all come hither,
Whither do ye fly?  ah, whither!
Stop, and hear the voice of time
Sounding blessings on your clime.

Touch the many chorded lyre,
Higher swell the tone, and higher;
Trill the flute, the viol sweep,
Lulling echo fast asleep.

Sons of industry and labour,
Blow the pipe, and beat the tabor,
And let all unite and strain,
"Time is now grown young again."
