MOLE.
Our liberties lopt off &mdash; we now deplore;
PITT has prevailed &mdash; and smoking is no more.
But will the canker of the state rest here?
Alas, mine ancient friends, more ills I fear!
Upon our legs and arms he means a tax,
And wood or cork or leather must pay snacks:
Nay, 'tis ev'n said, though that I'm not quite sure in,
He'll, like VESPASIAN, lay a tax on urine.
Our beer already tax'd &mdash; mysterious fate!
Must it be tax'd too &mdash; in a future state?

Now let us tell, while here we drink our porter,
How much our few short pleasures are made shorter,
By this excise extension, fine and fit,
Form'd by the great financier &mdash; Mr. PITT.

CLODIPOL.
How oft have I, in fields of corn or hay,
Broil'd in the burning sun the live-long day;
Yet well the evening all my toil repaid,
When in an arbour indolently laid,
With ale so mild, and fruit so tempting ripe,
I crack'd my jokes, and softly suck'd my pipe!

RATTLIN.
Aloft when clamb'ring on the crazy mast,
Crack'd by the thuder, broken by the blast,
While ocean's foam, mixt with the light'ning's glare,
And fiends infernal seem'd to rule the air;
The roar and riot I nor fear'd nor chid,
If from my pouch I could but snatch a quid.

MOLE.
How oft have I, high in the commons' gallery,
Watch'd many a weary night &mdash; for no great sallary,
List'ning with heavy hear and jaded ear,
To "sounds that are a misery to hear;"
Yet all the dreary drudg'ry soon forgot,
Over a warming pipe and cheering pot!

CLODIPOL.
Sooner shall I swill this pot you see,
That slop, that trash, that reeking rot-gut &mdash; tea,
Or grease my jolly bacon-basted muns,
Like yonder Cheapside beaus &mdash; with butter'd buns,
Than cease to think, o'er ev'ry pot of beer,
Rest and promotion to our young premier!

RATTLIN.
Sooner shall sailors (Britons then no more)
Shrink from a gun at sea &mdash; or girl on shore;
Sooner shall I lap water like a dog,
While in my fist I grasp a can of grog,
Than fail to cry on lower deck or upper,
"May PITT be serv'd a salt eel to his supper!"

MOLE.
Sooner shall Great CHARLOTTE &mdash; out of season,
Squander the public cash &mdash; without good reason;
Sooner shall PITT require &mdash; LEAKE'S saving pills,
Or ROSE discharge &mdash; he secret service bills;
Sooner shall SHERIDAN prate like a gawby,
In phrase of Mr. MARTIN or JO. MAWBEY;
Sooner DUNDAS shall in the senate miss
To raise a laugh, by throwing out &mdash; his peace;
Sooner shall Captain TOPHAM, in dismay,
Take ship with BECKY WELLS for Botany Bay;
Than I forget, o'er ev'ry pipe I smoke,
On PITT'S designs confusion to invoke.
