Soft was the Season, solemn was the Time,
The Dawn of Sabbath, Summer in its Prime;
When good Eugenius, onward as he fares,
His Mind possess'd with more than mortal Cares,
A Voice (nor was the plaintive Author seen)
Alarms, &mdash; and dost thou fly?  unkind Eugene!
Once, lavish'd Hours and Pleasure would'st thou stay;
Invidious Hedge-Row, bar not Friendship's Way:
At Friendship's Voice (the Accents half express'd)
The Fence divides, the Speaker stands confess'd:
Heav'ns, is it thou!  burst forth on either Part,
And silent Tears clasp Friendship to the Heart.
Eusebius thus accosts his quondam Mate:&mdash;
Alas!  how try'd beneath the Hand of Fate!
Both greatly try'd!  and who shall now declare,
There goes the bookish, there the sober Pair?
What if they did, as well no Doubt they might,
'Twere only Matter of Contempt and Spite;
On modern Merit all Preferment waits;
Go, flatter Fools, and cringe at Vice's Gates;
And yet are all Things pre-engaged so long,
To raise a Cure demands a pleasing Tongue;
Which, to preserve, must those, that Thoughts restrain,
Forbear the graceless 'Squire, and brutal Swain?
Ah, luckless Choice!  parental Love severe!
When rev'rend Doctor sooth'd there fondest Ear.

EUGENIUS.
Talk not of Grief, what Griefs with mine compare?
O Soul of Sympathy beguile my Care;
A gentle Dame (the Rich have none so good)
With ev'ry Requisite but Wealth endow'd,
Thrice gave me Joy, thrice gave me hopeless Pain,
Dear Pledges of our Loves, that still remain;
We scheme, we drudge, we ply a thousand Means,
And starve, one Comfort, &mdash; 'tis behind the Scenes:
To ward the Peasant's Gibe, the Farmer's Frown,
I whirl the Doubling-Wheel and shun the Town;
Two distant Fanes expect my weary Way,
And twenty annual Pounds my Toils repay.
Shall callous Hands?  shall each unletter'd Name?
The Comb that brandish, or that shake the Frame;
Or shall the Wight that tags my final Word,
Fare better, or look greater, than his Lord?
Ah, luckless Choice!  parental Love severe!
When rev'rend Doctor won their cheated Ear.

EUSEBIUS.
Thy Plea how just!  thy Plaint speaks sore Distress,
Must Heav'n sollicit Earth without Redress?
By sick Debauch, we Mortals ill at Ease?
The Doctor's honour'd, amply are his Fees;
The wayward Soul by ev'ry Vice bewray'd,
Scorns Gratitude, and spurns our aweful Aid;
In vain provoke we Sloth, and point the Palm,
And stretch to Impotence the healing Balm;
Lewd Idiots mock with ribbald Phrase the Lore,
And &mdash; Parson &mdash; means &mdash; impertinent and poor;
When Virtue resign'd, rever'd, and great in Place,
Ere Pride and Luxury had show'd their Face;
Or Gold usurp'd, of modest Worth the Meed,
And Wit and Beauty were vouchsaf'd the Lead;
Ere Complaisance supply'd the Language of the Heart;
With Truth, Simplicity in Leagues combin'd,
And Mortals glory'd to be just and kind.
Ah, sad Reverse!  what devious Paths are trod!
How shun'd the faithful Guide, the Man of God!
Ah, luckless Choice!  parental Love severe!
When rev'rend Doctor sooth'd their fondest Ear.
Too soon, vain World, thy Pomps bright Cares must end;
Faith, Patience, Hope, be strong. &mdash; Adieu, my Friend.
