At the Season when Nature descends,
And scatters the Plain with sweet Flow'rs;
When Phoebus his Influence lends,
And the Earth is refresh'd with Soft Show'rs;

In the Morning pursuing their Walk,
Young Strephon and Daphne I saw;
How engaging they seemed to talk!
While their Eyes told each other their Joy.

By the Side of the Hedge they stepp'd slow,
Nor suffer'd, neglected, to die,
The Herbs that profusely-wild grow,
Known alone to the curious Eye.

Now over the Gate they reclin'd,
Intent on the Husbandman's Toil;
Who when Earth, soft relenting, proves kind,
Plows, cleanses, or sows his rich Soil.

Then down to the Mead they would stray,
Where the Verdure refreshes the Sight;
But frequently paus'd by the Way,
With apt Words to express their Delight.

To the Hill now their Walk I pursu'd,
Where new Objects new Pleasure impart;
And as Nature's fair Portrait they view'd,
This Lesson they read to my Heart:

With these Beauties how charm'd is the Eye!
The Prospect how varied and gay!
My Strephon, those Scenes we espy,
Though speechless, Instruction convey.

The Fields kept so neat and so clean,
Which the Farmer each Day doth inspect,
Remind me of home, that within
There should nought be confin'd by Neglect.

The Stream that glides smoothly along,
Bids me never meet Passion with Rage;
If you frown &mdash; I will sing a soft Song;
Your Anger soft Words shall assuage.

The Sheep that enliven the Plain,
Not far from their Shepherd will roam,
Seem to say, that true Pleasure in vain
Is sought for, if not found at home.

Dear Daphne, that Village observe,
There, how happy the few who reside!
They live, without guileful Reserve,
At a Distance from Folly and Pride.

Simplicity walks with the Clown;
Coy Modesty dwells with the Fair;
For Charity look to yon Dome;
The Vicar and her should be there.

Mark yon Cot, rear'd for plain humble Swains,
Where Blessings, though few, greatly please,
'Tis the Lot of the Peasant, who gains
With his Evenings Contentment and Ease.

There Temperance, healthful and gay,
Smiles at Labour, though coarse be his Meat;
With a Song he salutes the new Day,
And his Bread and his Rest are both sweet.

There, obscur'd, modest Worth steals through Life,
With Peace, smiling Peace, at his Board;
To the gay busy Crowd they leave Strife,
Nor envy the Miser his Hoard.

There Prudence too, neatly array'd,
Has found a snug wholesome Retreat;
Her Care she owns fully repaid,
If Colin still finds her discreet.

Let the Hero stake Life for a Name;
Let Ambition court Guilt, Pomp, and Glare;
Let the Gay waste their Days in Love's Flame;
Can they ever with Virtue compare?

That Virtue which seeks yon Retreats!
That Devotion those Scenes must inspire!
O!  let me enjoy their soft Sweets!
Those Pleasures which Sages admire!

They illumine the Mind with their Ray,
And point to the first forming Cause;
From each Insect, and every Spray,
Reflection an Inference draws.

Hail Nature!  or rather to thee,
Jehovah, our Praises be paid!
Whose Wisdom in Nature we see,
Whose Goodness in all is display'd.
