It happened once (in old or modern Time,
It matters not, it's all the same in Rhime)
A Body, and I need not here relate
Whether a Body sole or corporate,
Disorder'd was, and dire Convulsions shook
Each vital Part, and every Limb forsook
Its wonted Office, every Pulse beat high,
Each Symptom threaten'd Dissolution nigh.
You well suppose a Doctor sent for, come,
You'll see his learned Wig and Cane, you'll hear his Hum!
Fancy each Pulse, each Word deliberate pop,
Like Hartshorn from the Vial, Drop by Drop;
You'll hear him call for Paper, Pen and Ink,
And hum, and pause, and hum, and seem to think;
Then take his Fee, and leave &mdash; and leave his Scrawl;
This surely happen'd, say you &mdash; not at all.
Suppose no fit Physician in the Place,
And from the Body you should know the Case;
For Body, Belly, Members, Head, can tell,
(This, as at Rome once, is no Miracle)
In all Disorders, whence the Mischief rose,
What Members in the Body are its Foes.

The Head began, and boasted much that he
Had Opticks clear, and readily could see
Friend Belly was to blame, when at a Treat,
Shame to the Body!  it refus'd to eat.
And, oh!  Disgrace and Infamy to think,
The Body suffer'd, for it would not drink.

Your Friendship, says the Belly, I disclaim:
When in this Body was I e'er to blame?
Let Festivals and Gawdies be increas'd,
Not Caius' Belly more than mine would feast.
To Cambridge I appeal, your Censure's vain,
Harmonic Sir, and might not I complain?
With equal Reason, censure might not I,
Knowing your strumming and your Harmony.
Say, you wrought all this Mischief in our Breast
Because you would not treat our Catch Club Guest
With Songs and Madrigals?  You brought Disgrace
And Infamy, for you'd not thrum your Bass.
You boast, your mighty Wisdom saves us all,
You're our Support, without you we must fall.
The Belly, say they, has no Ears, and you,
Doubtless, deny me Skill in Opticks too.
Can't I demonstrate, without Euclid's Pains,
That, in our Body, Belly has the Brains?
And all agree, where there's a brainless Head,
That Body can't be better taught than fed.
Cease then &mdash; And here another Member rose,
Friend to the Head &mdash; Sirs, let me interpose;
Some say the Heart's in Fault, and some I've seen
Who say the Mischief rises from the Spleen;
These, and not few, on Phlegm for Vengeance call,
Those charge the great o'erflowing of the Gall:
Others, wise, worldly wise, who reason calm,
Well skill'd in Palmistry, accuse the Palm.
Thus different Subjects furnish different Tongues;
I must acquit the Head and charge the Lungs,
The Lungs alone are chargeable &mdash; had they
On that great Festival, that glorious Day,
When the good Catch-Club mission'd their good Chief,
To learn of us the Lord's Prayer and Belief,
To study the Harmonics of our Head,
And how on the great Bass to take the Lead;
Had they, in lucky Hour, inspir'd the Voice,
All had been happy in our Reverend Boyce;
The mighty Master then had smiled to see
Musick and Love were in the same Degree.

Softly sweet in Lydian Measures,
Soon he'd sooth'd the Soul to Pleasures;
War he'd sung was Toil and Trouble,
Honour but an empty Bubble,
Life is ending, Love beginning,
Kissing still, and never cloying:
If the Fair be worth the winning,
Think, oh think her worth enjoying.
Lovely S&mdash;m&mdash;r sits beside thee,
Take the Good the Gods provide thee.
The Many rend the Skies with loud Applause,
Love had been crown'd, and Musick won the Cause.
The P&mdash;r, unable to conceal his Pain,
Had view'd the Fair,
Who caus'd his Care,
Had sigh'd and look'd, sigh'd and look'd,
Sigh'd and look'd, and sigh'd again.
At length with Wine and Love at once oppress'd,
The peerless P&mdash;r had sunk upon her Breast.
