Peace to the hapless Loves of Aribert,
The rustic Pipe, and Bessybella's Scorn:
A Theme far less inglorious to display,
On trembling, unfledg'd Pinions, I attempt
The winning Magic of unfetter'd Song.

Ye Beaux, of Name equivocal and Sex,
Whose snuff-polluted Nostrils still pervert
The genuine Purpose of the SACRED WEED,
Deem not these Strains unworthy of your Ear:
I sing the QUID.  For whilom well I ween
Such Notes as these e'en Browne and Philips sung,
And Warton, foremost in poetic Fame.
Nor think the pleasing Labour I pursue
Sans Inspiration.  Oft' in Fancy's Eye
The awful Shade of Rawleigh woo'd the Muse,
And urg'd with solemn Beck the tardy Lay.

How happy I, if ev'ry Day I view
My Box replete!  Nor yet less happy he,
Who in the snugger Pouch of Seal-skin sleek,
Or Leather, (the Remains, the dear Remains,
Of Apron past Employ) or Bladder twist,
A QUID retains of that celestial Plant,
Yclept Tobacco.  In whatever Form
Coasign'd to please my Taste and Appetite,
It matters not; whether quadrangular,
(A Cut minute for earthen Tubes prepar'd,
Bland and of glossy Hue) or friendly SHAGG,
Or Form still more commodious, PIG-TAIL hight,
Me it regards not, whether by the Hand
Of Negro, or Mulatt, or Buckaraa,
Prepar'd; or from what distant Clime convey'd,
Virginia, Caribbana, Trinidad,
Or from th' Antilles, or the sedgy Shore,
Where Oroonoko rolls a murky Wave.

Blest Plant!  with thee, contented I enjoy
A Life of Labour, and a Mind at Ease,
If in Content and Health there is Enjoy
To one, who no Alternative hath felt
Of fell Disease, and heart-corroding Care.

Oft, as the o'er-fraught Barge, in Summer's Calm,
Or Spring's unruly Flood, demands my Aid,
Alert and ready, with mouth-moistening QUID
My willing Hand I lend.  Or if my Toils
In Bagley I pursue; or that fam'd Grove,
Where weedy Isis, in serpentine Form,
Drags o'er the Meads her winding Tail; and where,
Fast by the Stream, the ever-restless Sprite
Of jealous Eleanor by Moonlight mopes,
While Rosamond a peaceful Requiem finds;
Gleesome, the polish'd Magazine I view
Surcharg'd with fresh Supplies.  Nor envy I
The o'er-grown Rich, far poorer than myself:
But ere the stubborn Oak submits, and ere
The Steel well-temper'd triumphs; ere the Arms
That lately flourish'd in a large Expanse,
In captive Faggots lie, a recent Chew
The glad Hiatus of my Mouth supplies.
The many a Blow, by artful Strength laid in,
And frequent Hem!  prove Milo's Vigour weak;
Nor Grecian Theseus, fam'd for mighty Deeds,
Outvie'd my brawny Sinews, tighter brac'd
By the astringent Juice from QUID embru'd.

Say who, without TOBACCO'S Aid, could foil
The Stench of human Sacrifices made
When the full Quag my midnight Hour employs,
Say what Compare between such Feats as these,
And Hercules' in Lerna's noisome Lake!
E'en I, more fam'd than all my grave Compeers,
For Visage settled, and unruffled Form,
Could scarce contain my Presence, when I bawl
Through ev'ry Avenue, or spacious Street,
The last Confession of a Convict hang'd,
Save that the QUID all-helping Grace affords.

Full oft, when Evening, ruddy Maid, arrives,
And Shepherd, ever mindful, sees his Flock,
On Hillock dry ypent; or careless Hind
Unlocks the Traces from the piercing Share,
And, whistling, drives the plodding Oxen home,
My Sport commences:  And, with wiley Arts,
Such as of yore our wise Forefathers held
Healthy and honourable; but in modern Day,
By their degenerate Children Poaching hight,
My moonlight Hours I pass.  Divine Employ!
To lay the latent Sniggle; or, with Hand
Experienc'd, o'er the fluttering Bird to draw
Remorseless Death, to thriving Partridge due;
Or in the Isis, with Herculean Whirl,
To deal Destruction on the finny Race,
Of Chevin, Pike, or Perch; for what to me
Are Sleep and Viands, (save the gladsome Draught
Of Goblet oft apply'd, and oft replete)?
My vacant Loins with Leathern Girdle brac'd,
And the lov'd PLANT, all Midnight Ills defy.

Not with these Joys the Day I always crown,
Laborious always:  No, relaxing Change
Heightens the Goust, and relishes Delight.
Oft let me hie to Ostend's snug Retreat,
And there, beneath the Myrtle's tender Shade,
Hold fondest Dalliance with the slip-shoed Fair.
What, if intoxicated Student rush
Impertinent upon my softest Hours,
The equal-loving Nymph be mine or his,
As Manhood shall decide.  I roll my QUID,
And with tremendous Look advance:  The Youth,
Unskill'd in Arts Gymnastic, dreads my Frown,
And strait retires among his stripling Mates;
Where, flusht with Bacchus, wond'rous Deeds he tells,
Of bruising, drinking, lying with the Maid
He never saw; until the opiate Draught
Enfolds his Eyes, and seals his babbling Tongue.

O let me raise sublime the lowly Lay,
With what the Muse has often smil'd to hear
At Captain Jolly's, whilom fam'd in Song:
How oft, with fixt Intent, have I enjoy'd
The sage Harangue of Bibliopolist
Profound and pompous!  he who can display
With Sybil Skill the mystical Intent
Of ministerial Paragraphs; and who
Such Tales can tell, in Greek and Latin Phrase,
As Rome, or older Athens, never knew:
There too oft meet Sir Thomas, and my Lord,
In Coat of many Colours, sprucely dight,
Out-numbering Rainbow's various Dies:
Mechanicks of all Ranks with these conjoin,
To quaff the froth-crown'd Quart in Concert sweet;
And, with superior, or with nether Lip,
Gracefully prominent, in deep Debate
To fix the Fate of Empires, and of Kings.

O ye, return'd from Granby's Triumphs, ye
Who late with Pococke plow'd th' Atlantic Wave,
What was your Solace on Mindenian Plains?
TOBACCO!  Who th' Hermoine had won,
But that Tobacco lent its pow'rful Aid!

These are thy Honours then, Virginian Dock,
That chiefly unto thee Britannia owes
Her conquering Forces, and her Hearts of Oak:
That by thy Help reviving Manhood vies
With Arthur's Knights, and Foresters of old!

O W&mdash;, ever Mignion of the Muse,
Suffer this once thy peerless Name to grace
My Lays inglorious; and, amid thy Bays,
TOBACCO'S fragrant Leaves to interweave!
So round some Oak, the Glory of the Plains,
Whose Arms invite each sun-burnt Traveller,
The feeble Ivy's wreathing Branches twine,
And, thus suppliant, emulate the Skies.
