How pleas'd the Beau who, dupe to fashion's mode,
Disdaining Ridicule, triumphant wears
The pretty Shoe-string.  He ne'er views with pain
The gaudy buckle, or the clasp antique
Erst worn by Miser old, Curmudgeon hight,
Affected still by prigs of younger date.
Nor cares he for the swagg'ring fop, who weaves,
Obedient to his Will the curl, and trims
The chin criniferous, or coxcomb youth
'Prentice, or Journeyman yclep'd, because
Their Calceaments this ornament display,
If ornament it can be call'd.  But if
Whom cruel Fate hath doom'd to toil severe
For pittance small, the stubborn Clay to plow,
Almost a stubborn as the master's Heart,
Must ne'er expect my instep to adorn
With this parade of universal Taste;
Nor yet with buckle of Sheffieldian make,
Gigantic, fit for Herculean foot,
Or fabricated at that Town renown'd
In region Warwickshire, smoke-involv'd,
Fuligenous &mdash; where thousands ply the tool
Ingenious to contrive &mdash; from many a forge
Whence issue forth, coal-burnt, at tide of moon
A number multitudinous &mdash; nor less,
When Night o'er each work-weary, drudging Wretch
Her curtain drops opaque.  With leathern throng
Tough ligament!  I bind my clouted shoe,
That oft hath stood the furious, batt'ring storm,
Tho' now some three years wasted, nor the Want
Of buckle much regret, since I behold
The Man of Mode this ancient fixture wear,
Tho' in more costly guise.  The hint from me,
Or some laborious Vassal, like to me,
He borrow'd, he deriv'd.  The self-same Hint
I borrow'd from a Child, when first I ken'd
The cottage-living Matron, in sweet terms
Of coaxing accent, tie the little shoe
Firm on the tender infant's pigmy foot,
Mary, or Margaret &mdash; names of humble note,
Which in the circle of politer life
Had been far more dulcifonous, and chang'd
To Margaretta, or Maria, soft.
Thus, tho' the tyrant Fashion governs all,
And makes absurdity still more absurd,
We see the Shoe-string is a childish thing,
And he who wears this badge, altho' six feet
In Altitude, high-tow'ring 'bove the rest,
Is but another child of larger growth.
My destiny, alas!  is circumscrib'd
By dire-necessity, and not by chance
Spontaneous &mdash; gladly else would I adapt
The buckle neat, and be the village-beau.
Mean time to wishy-washy fops I leave
The silken tie, content with leathern thong,
Compact, and tough, the manlier of the two.
