Led by the Beauty of declining Day,
In solitary Walk up yonder Hill,
As oft induc'd, I took my weary Way,
Where in soft Murmurs rolls the neighb'ring Rill.

The tuneful Birds, chaste Tenants of the Grove,
Left the warm Plains, and sought the cooler Dale,
And there pour'd forth their Evening Tales of Love,
Till o'er the Sun Night threw her shadowing Veil.

The World now left to silence and to me,
Save where the Owl pour'd forth her horrid Note,
Or the hoarse Raven from some neighb'ring Tree,
Sent her loud Sonnet from her croaking Throat.

I wander'd long, by Meditation drawn,
Thro' darksome Groves and solitary Glades,
O'er yonder Plains, and yonder Desert Lawn,
Thro' yonder Wood, dark with nocturnal Shades.

At last, fatigu'd with wandering so long
Thro' unknown Paths, beneath a friendly Oak
At Ease I stretch'd my weary Limbs along,
And whilst I lay, in whispering Voice one spoke:

"Sure yonder Bird portends some future Ill,
Croaking its Notes from yonder aged Tree,
Whose Boughs reclining o'er the chrystal Rill,
Form a cool Shade for Meditation free.

"The Curfew's Sound I think too true I hear,
Bor'n by the Zephyr's rising from yon' Town,
With loud repeated Tolls salute the Ear,
Tolls which proclaim (perhaps) my Hylas gone.

"Hylas the happiest of the rural Swains,
Bless'd with each Virtue that adorns a Man,
A true and faithful Friend &mdash; no more remains!
So short and transient is this narrow Span!

"Oft have I miss'd him on yon' distant Hill:
Yon' well-known Walk and solitary Shade
No more delighted; and yon' murm'ring Rill,
By softly flowing, show'd her Hylas dead.

"Thus must we all, like Hylas, soon or late,
The Good, the Bad, the Coward, and the Brave,
Aguize the Pow'r of all subduing Fate,
And sleep lamented in the lonesome Grave."

Rous'd by this Voice, for thro' my vital Frame
Affliction steer'd its penetrating Course,
And glow'd my Bosom with Care's subtle Flame,
Which still continu'd to augment its Force.

Rous'd by this Voice, the doubtful Place I sought
From whence I judg'd th' unpleasing Sounds to come,
When lo!  in Tears I found (unpleasing Thought)
Alexis fearful of his Hylas' Doom.

Aw'd at the Sight, with frantick Looks I gaz'd,
(For all the Pow'r of Speech with Joy was fled)
And stood perplex'd, astonish'd and amaz'd!
For what is Life when a dear Friend is dead!

When thus Alexis, in a feeble Tone
Approaching mourn'd his Hylas now no more,
And mourn'd with him all Joys and Friendship gone,
Which well were known (when Hylas liv'd) before.

For see him bor'n thro' yonder Church-Yard Way,
Lov'd by yon' Throng, and dearly lov'd by thee;
Approach and read, for you can read the Lay
Engrav'd on Stone beneath yon' Ivy-Tree.

INSCRIPTION.
Kind Spectators drop a Tear,
Ever due to the Sincere;
Since beneath this Stone doth lie,
A Man as good as e'er could die.
