Pardon presumption in a rustick swain,
Whose lowly muse aspires to lofty strain:
With notes uncouth, with weak and faultring tongue,
The poet wanting, and his lyre unstrung:
What arrogance!  or say, from whence the spring,
That causes Colinclout t' attempt to sing?
As nought below cou'd such a clown refine,
The object surely then must be divine.
Prophetick spirit in so mean a boor!
To make thee sing, who never sung before.
But Colin, with thy clouted muse, be brief,
And sing of Sylvia, and her neck-kerchief.

Hail, beauteous goddess!  heaven's chiefest care!
All nature's pride, and fairest of all fair!
The field's chief flower, sweet beyond compare!
Blast to each nymph, and bloom to ev'ry swain
Pride of the hill, and glory of the plain!
Nature, that made thee, with herself at strife,
Saith, that the world hath ending with thy life.

As I with equal wonder and delight,
Beheld thy beauties deck'd in native white,
Joy fill'd my heart, an angel fill'd my sight,
Long I look'd on, (who cou'd not long look on,
That such an object had to look upon?)
And view'd around, observ'd each moving part,
Saw how thy eyes kept concert with thy heart.
"So fair a form!  with such devotions join'd!
A virgin body, with a spotless mind;
Pleas'd with her pray'rs, while heav'n propitious sees
The lovely votress on her bended knees;
Sure it must think some angel lost its way,
And happ'ning on this wretched earth to stray,
Tir'd with its follies fain wou'd take its flight,
And begs to be restor'd to those blest realms of light."

For this, and ev'ry good, you humbly plead,
So angels do, and doubtless thus you did.
Your vows thus offer'd, you with thoughts serene,
And mind compos'd, arose, with graceful mien,
T' adorn that place, where every grace had been;
When love's all envy'd vail lay unespy'd,
Ungen'rous vails!  that such fair beauties hide.
Celestial globes!  where love triumphant plays,
And ev'ry grace each rapt'rous charm surveys;
Venus in state doth on these thrones appear,
She keeps her Paphos and Cythera here.
And cou'dst thou, Sylvia!  such a vail devise,
(Thou who giv'st life, and light to human eyes)
To cloud those worlds, where all that's pow'rful lies?
Thou rather ought'st to have reveal'd thy pow'r,
And shew'd us mortals, what we might adore.
Well might'st thou wonder, and with wonder ask,
Where went thy kerchief?  and dull Colin task.
Thrice stupid swain!  the goddess shone so bright,
As vail'd his senses in th' abyss of night;
A face!  a shape!  a voice so sweet and clear,
Celestial musick warbled in his ear.
Silent!  abash'd!  unknowing what to say,
At length, said yes for no, and no for ay.
But when those beams that shadow'd him were past
Sense, day, and all return'd that was o'er-cast;
Then he cou'd tell thee, thou divinest maid!
The vail, 'tis true, was given for a shade,
In angry seasons, to protect thy charms,
And shield thy beauties from tempestuous harms:
But when all nature smiles with gay delight,
And Phoebus sues of thee to borrow light,
Thou slight'st his courtship, with thy seeming coy,
He pouts, and tells his tale to th' amorous boy;
How that a fair, of ev'ry charm possest,
Conceals them all, within a flinty breast.
Love flies in haste, saw where the cov'ring lay,
And whilst for justice to the gods you pray,
The injur'd god hence snatch'd his own away.

Learn then, bright nymph!  to use thy pow'r aright,
Nor vail thy beauties in perpetual night;
Lest all the gods combine in a dispute,
Each take their own, and leave thee destitute.
This coarse advice to thy refiner ear,
Kindly receive, and think a swain sincere.
