DOROTHY.
What!  Roger, why thus saunt'ring here alone!
Your Fellow-Servants all a-Field are gone;
And Maister, when his Breakfast's o'er, I trow,
So fine a Day as this himself will go.

ROGER.
And go he may, for Roger, much I mind,
He may be angry too since you're unkind.
Ah!  Dolly!  little did I dream that you,
Who in the Cow-house vow'd t be so true
To me alone, another's Heart could take
So soon, and with your Slights your Roger's break;
And break it shall, however Joan may try
To make me false to you, I'll sooner die.

DOROTHY.
Indeed I wis not what you mean, my Love,
Unkind in what did e'er your Dolly prove?
Do I not, all the Time that I can spare,
To where you toil alone, with Speed repair,
Nay often too, in your set Days of Work,
I've took my Part, and bore with you the Fork;
Pleas'd when soe'er I make you Labour light,
And gain a Leisure-Hour for you at Night.
And when by Houshold Cares I'm forc'd away,
With thee how much more willing could I stay?
Ev'n Yester-Eve to thee a Peach I brought,
For which Kate Mully made me pay a Groat:
Nor should I grutch it, were it twice as dear,
Tho' for a Pound, you know, I serve a Year.
Those very Hose, that you have now got on,
Of softest Wooll I late and early spun,
And did, whene'er I've been on Errands sent,
With pleasure knit 'em all the way I went;
And sooth I should not take such Pains, I trow,
For one I did not bear some Kindness to

ROGER.
And have you then forgot what past this Morn
When Simon met you in yon Field of Corn;
Doubtless a merry Wag, you laugh'd so loud,
I heard you to the Hay-rick, where I stood
At little Ease, you well may deem, to see
The only Man I hate and so so free:
Yet if you e'er did love me, tell me, Lass,
What that foul Goatherd's Purpose tow'rds you was;
Full feign I'd think you honest, tho' I fear,
And long to know what much I dread to hear.

DOROTHY.
'Twas only this; yet blame me not that I,
To think you should suspect me, can't but cry.

ROGER.
Nay, prithee weep not; if these Fears are vain,
No more such Doubtings shall perplex your Swain,
Who, lest he wrongs you, suffers till you say
What Business plac'd the Lubbar in your way;
And as from jealous Love's too forward blame,
You clear to faithful Hodge your injur'd Name,
With your Consent I will, next Holy-tide,
Before our Vicar, take thee for my Bride;
For, blest in thee, I would not change my State,
However mean, for all the 'Squire's Estate.

DOROTHY.
And, Roger, e'er I would your Slights deserve,
Far from all Aid, a wretched Wight I'd starve;
Know then, as early to the Lawn I hy'd,
E'er the warm Sun the dewy Grass had dry'd,
I met the Clown in Rowland's Barley-Field,
Who caught me by the Hand, and fast it held.
It seems he me for Biddy's Comrade took,
From my black Eyes and rosy-colour'd Look;
Much of her Slights he did to me complain,
And begg'd my Aid her Favour to obtain:
I laught to find so great a Secret out,
When, quickly undeceiv'd, the staring Lout,
Vex'd to the Heart to have himself betray'd,
Some time his want of Caution did upbraid;
Then press'd me not a Secret to disclose,
Which sure would be the Spring of endless Woes.
I joke'd, and beg'd his pardon, if I told
A Secret which himself he could not hold.
With that the Blood 'gan leave his Sun-burnt Face,
And pale Revenge seem'd rising in its place.
His trembling Legs too, like an Aspen shook,
The while I struggling from his Clutches broke;
I ran to Rowland's, where the Churn was sent,
And he tow'rds Goody Barnet's Meadow went.
And, as I prize your Love, and dread your Hate,
This only was the Business I relate.
And know, my Roger, without thee, I'd die,
Rather than both my Master's Farms enjoy:
For, be assur'd, whenever me you wed,
You to your Arms will take an honest Maid.

ROGER.
What Comfort has your Tale poor Roger given,
Whose Heart e'er now with deepest Grief was riven?
Your Words (methinks) have made you look more fair
Than whitest Lillies in their Bloom appear.
Till now, I never lov'd you half so much,
Nor, for your sake, will any Labour grutch;
To milk the udder'd Kine, or press the Cheese,
Or churn, or any thing my Dolly please.
To the next Fair we'll both together hie,
Where for thy Finger I'll a Thimble buy
Of purest Silver, be it e'er so dear,
Which the first Letters of thy Name shall bear.
Then at the Leathern Jack ourselves regale,
Till wayward Night comes on, with Cakes and Ale.

DOROTHY.
Oh, how I wish the loitering Time away,
For such a Proof of Love, and such a Day;
But prithee tell, what Arts does Joan contrive,
Of your true Heart your Dolly to deprive?
What can she do?  what Gifts has she to give,
Who, as I'm told, has scarcely how to live?
A dreadful Shrew, all the whole Parish knows,
And at her Heels for ever hang her Hose;
To darn them well would more become the Quean,
Through which her dirty Leg I've often seen.

ROGER.
O mind her not, my Life, a childish Lass,
From her own Door I scarce should know her Face;
But, hist!  my Maister; we're no more conceal'd;
You to your cleanly Dairy, I'll a-field;
Where, midst the Swains, from other Troubles free,
But what thy Absence gives, I'll think on thee.
Thy honest Love shall make my Labour light,
Till with the rest I home return at Night;
When we together in the Barn will be,
From Maister's Eye, and irksome Business free,
I on a Hurdle sate, and Dolly on my Knee.
