SONS OF SEDITION, strike the String,
No vulgar theme demands the Lay;
And, though ye execrate a KING,
Sure, ye will celebrate this GLORIOUS DAY,
'Tis FOX'S BIRTH-DAY!  give the praises due
To him who holds the Throne of BAMFYLDE MOORE CAREW!

KING OF THE BEGGARS, hail!  at thy command
Thousands shall pour from COPENHAGEN Field;
In PALACE YARD behold they take their stand,
Thy tongue at once their weapon and their shield,
With roaring voices, lo!  they call on THEE,
To preach the rabble Creed of FRENCH EQUALITY.

Tell them the hideous change of bankrupt FRANCE,
Where FRAUD and MURDER prop the potent plan,
Is still, whate'er weak Bigots may advance,
THE NOBLEST FABRIC EVER RAIS'D BY MAN.

Tell them, tho' GAUL the flag of WAR unfurl'd,
And bade, in ev'ry State, Allegiance cease,
That BRITAIN, still the Mistress of the World,
Should basely sue for ignominious Peace.

Tell them that LAW'S, an odious, mean controul,
Beneath whose yoke no gen'rous Spirits cower;
And the Resistance, with the free-born soul,
Should always be a question but of Power;
If thy have strength enough to shake a Throne,
The honour, as the danger, be their own.

But check, my Muse, the fond presumptuous Lay:
Nor vainly deem,
That, when DEMOCRACY'S the theme,
Thou e'er canst teach a PATRIOT what to say.

Hark!  hark!  some Orator, in mischief strong,
Who, wild with factious ire,
Takes mad ambition for prophetic fire,
Indignant pours the imitative Song:

"Ruin seize thee, rigid PITT,
Confusion on thy Party wait,
While on the Treas'ry Bench they sit,
And prop OLD ENGLAND'S happy state.
Statutes, Patriots to oppress,
Nor e'en thy merits, which we must confess,
Shall screen thy ear from discontented cries,
From Faction's curse, from Faction's lies."

Thus spoke the men, who urg'd the Ruffian zeal
Of a low Mob t' insult their KING, as late
He pass'd, absorb'd in cares for BRITAIN'S weal,
To move the Springs that energize the State.
Pert ERSKINE, envious, dropt his lantern jaws,
"Huzza!" cry'd TAYLOR Chick, an cluckt applause.

On a Board, a Rabble Crew
Rais'd near Old RUFUS' legal Hall,
Rob'd in a garb of Buff and Blue,
He pour'd his patriotic bawl.
(Dark his face, and sable hair
Shook, like a Mop, amid the troubled air;)
And, with a BRISSOT'S guile, and MARAT'S zeal,
He rung the Jacobinic peal:

"See how the WHIG and CORRESPONDING Bands
Join to prevent the passing of the Bills;
At thee, O!  PITT, they stretch their eager hands,
On thee they imprecate a thousand ills:
Crouding no more, for fear they soon shall hang,
To low-bred JONES'S noise, or THELWALL'S coarse harangue.

"Stopt is sly PALMER'S cant,
That lur'd a Rebel train;
Rash GERALD droops within the Transport's hold&mdash;
Patriots ye seek in vain,
MUIR, whose furious rant
Made self-rais'd DELEGATES in Faction bold.

"To BOTANY'S opprobrious Bay
Chain'd they go, with anguish pale,
Far, far away, the penal varlets sail,
Where dex'trous BARRINGTON holds legal sway.
Dear lost Associates of my tow'ring views,
Dear as the Dice-box to my ravish'd ear&mdash;
Dear as a batter'd Beauty from the Stews&mdash;
Ye visit Rogues as bad as any here.
No more I'll wail.  Not there they sail&mdash;
In neutral ships, a daring clan,
I see them post to Gallia' Coast,
Declaimers of the RIGHTS OF MAN.
With me they wish prosperity to GAUL,
And wait, in anxious hope, the moment of thy fall.

"Motions make, and questions ask,
The Premier's measures to defeat;
Each debate renew the task,
The aims of Party to complete.
Fix the point, and fix the man,
In Senate to resume the goading plan,
Till shouts of triumph echo through the Hall&mdash;
Shouts, that the Minister soon must fall.
Exulting, Brethren, how with eager hands
We pounce upon the perquisites of Place,
And soon we squeeze, to recompence our Bands,
Th' Exchequer dry.  How happy now our case!
REFORM stalks forth, the NOBLES are decoy'd&mdash;
DEMOCRACY ascends, and MONARCHY'S destroy'd.

"Lofty Statesman, lofty PITT,
Lo!  he's on Opposition side:
No Place we leave, no Man admit,
Who us'd against us to divide.
Is his Brother out of Place?
His Brother's out.  His Brother's in disgrace.
Th' inferior Agents all must share his doom,
Gone for our Legion to make room.
Deep are our plots, and sly the means they chuse,
When Patriots first to change a State essay,
In specious guise, REFORM her aim pursues,
Rights to revolve, Abuses lop away;
Unconscious, some BOLD CHIEF, in lawless hour,
May stride o'er all, and keep the reins of Pow'r.

"Raise loud the call for Peace,
An Embassy provide,
Push'd from his Place, he yet will prop the Crown:
Soon on his hopeless side
His former Friends decrease,
And vote no longer for a Patron down.
Heard ye the storm of fierce debate,
Voice no voice, and vote no vote?
Long nights of wrangling shall convulse each throat,
And through the Rival Parties shake the State.

"Ye Chiefs of PARIS, Friends to Patriot Truth,
Whose lev'ling Virtue laid your Monarch low;
Despise his offspring's sex, and simple youth;
And let her to her mourning kindred go.
Above, below, tri-colours glow,
Twin'd with the boughs of FREEDOM'S Tree they fly:
Thy spirit, GAUL, will spread o'er all,
Draining the Regal Fountain dry:
Now, Brothers, our designs will soon be known,
Our triumphs to complete, we mean to seize the Throne.

"PITT, we doom thy certain fall,
(Spread we the net &mdash; we set the gin&mdash;)
We must seize thy Places all.
(He's out at last &mdash; we hasten in.)
Stay, oh!  stay, ye exil'd train!
Leave not a Party who your cause maintain.&mdash;
At yon blest shore, where Regicides command;
They stop, and take them hand in hand.
But oh!  what Noble Chiefs in GALLIA rise;
Exacting Constitutions as they please!
Patrons of Pillage, bless my eager eyes,
Ye great Collectors, teach me arts like these!&mdash;
No more Hereditary Rights avail&mdash;
All hail, ye SELF-RAIS'D KINGS, YE FIVE DIRECTORS, hail!

"Back'd by many a Patriot bold,
Aloft their crimson fronts they rear,
And POISSARDE Dames, and Ruffians old,
In furious Anarchy appear.
In the midst the FIVE who rule,
Their looks proclaim them of the Terror School;
Their grasping hands, their impost-raising plan,
Denote they'll make the most they can.
What yells Republican confuse the Hall!
What patriot phrensy spreads the general flame!
Hear, from above, dread ROBESPIERRE!  hear the brawl!
They deal forth horrors worthy of thy name.
The FORC'D LOAN moves, and as the land it racks,
Holds to the eyes of all, the many-killing acts.

"The Patriot verse prolong
On Politics or Play,
Or dinners at the Crown and Anchor drest,
'Mid BROOKS'S circle gay,
Or preaching to the throng
Of HONOUR, with our Party but a jest.&mdash;
A voice, as of the Treasury choir,
Bids my tow'ring visions die;
All my prophetic raptures sudden fly,
And lost in dull reality expire.
Stern, cautious PITT, think'st thou the feeble Acts
Thy Lawyers fram'd, will quell seditious prate;
Again, unblushing, we shall call for facts,
And shake the Senate with renew'd debate.
Enough for me:  with grief I see,
The diff'rent doom our fates assign;
Thine the KING'S choice, and Nation's voice&mdash;
Subscriptions and the Rabble mine."
He spoke, and waddling from the scaffold drew,
Dragg'd by a ruffian gang to join a Gambling crew.
