Now jocund Muses to an higer string
We tune our Lyre, a loftie Theame to sing,
And leave a while the vale, to mounten up
With bolder wing Pernassus heavenly top:
Where holy Virgin eldest of the nine,
Whose temples with a seven-fold crownet shine
And glorious mantle guildes the sable night,
With manie a thousand twinckling Chrysolite:
Say, in what part we find those happie stars
That keep enrol'd, in golden Characters,
The Fate of Princes, and eternall summe
Of all; that was, and ever is to come.
To after times, I may arightly read,
The hopefull Harvest of this heavenly seed.
For, can the bloud, derived from the veines
Of so great Princes, such imperiall Raignes,
Unhopefull be?  and Impe of richest root,
Deceive our wishes in abundant fruit:
Or whether this beene that same goodly tree,
That nigh the fertile Rhine must planted bee:
Whose fruitfull branch, should Europe over-spread,
And check the Heaven with her lofty-head:
Or one of those brave Worthies, joyn'd in one
With the red Lion of old Caledon,
(Foretold by Merlin, whose one foot should presse
The unshorne top of that vast wildernesse,
The other graspe, with farre extended power,
The Pyram of Troie-novants highest tower)
Should as so many fatall sunnes appeare
To chase the Crescent from our Hemispheare:
Or that strong arme expected long agoe,
Should give the Byzant beast a deadly blow:
At Collen bathing (drunke with Christian blood)
His loathed limmes in Rhenus silver flood,
I may not rash aread; but this I wot
How Janivere, his bitter rage forgot,
For lustie greene y' chang'd his frostie gray:
(As if he woed the sweet and daintie May)
For joy he brought first tidings of this birth,
And gave the goodliest New yeares gift on earth.
When smiling Gladnesse, child of heavenly Jove,
(Her daintie cordiall gotten from above)
With rosie fingers now beganne to shed
Ambrosian dewes with kisses tempered.
And drops for joy, Loves selfe had wept full often,
Wherewith she woont, afflicted hearts to soften,
That all to mirth, each Creature melted now,
Yea Envies selfe, though knew not why or how,
Untill thy beeing, Fame had fully blowne:
Thrice-welcome Infant, which no sooner knowne,
But reared weare in honour of thy name,
The goodliest sights Magnificence could frame;
When Piles bright burning, by the silent Moone
In every street, of midnight made the noone.
While silver bels, with iron tongues proclaime
A new borne Henry, to the Nymphes of Thame.
Yee Nymphes of Thame, whose lovely shape excels
So far the fairest of each Beautie els,
That you may boast both modell and the mould
Of her perfection.  What we doe behold
In stranger Countries, read in antique lines,
Are pourtraies, but of sunburnt Abissines,
To you compar'd; that Paphos seemes to me,
From Greece transported into Britannie.
And while I blazon broad this beautious crew;
Faire Sisters, let me draw the veile from you:
Who though yee live, retir'd from worldes eye,
Estrang'd from Court, and Cities vanitie,
For lovelie feature doe give place to none.
Whereto, your birth (as some high prized stone)
Though addes more lustre, yet the goodly care
Of vertuous life, wherein yee nourtred are,
Gives freer wing abroad unto your Fame,
Then your brave Beauties, or great Dudleies name.
They dedicate with one accord the day,
To all disport, and merriment they may;
For thy, thy stars foretell them happie peace,
And give their half-dead Hopes a new increase,
Faire morning bud of Englands white-red Rose,
And seventh Henry in her strifes compose:
If ever (God forbid) her breast should feele,
The bitter edge of her owne conquering steele:
Wherewith she woont with mightie arme to lop
The proudest head that durst her overtop.
Who com'st another anchor to her state,
For it she lost by wofull wreck alate;
That hate of Hell; nor Traytor Heaven-abhor'd
Doe what they may shall breake our triple cord,
Who sheildest, sleeping even in Mothers arme,
Thy Grandsire, uncle Prince, more safe from harme,
Then Axes, Tasters, Groomes about the bed,
Then strongest holdes, or gards twice doubled.
Who comet-like dost suddenly amaze
The stricken foe, who standing at the gaze
Amused, reads ore what unhappie Realme,
The bloudie Meteor shakes his fierie streame.
But as ore Haemus, when the morne hath drawne
Her purple Curtaines, after early dawne,
To lay to view her goodly golden pawne,
Her new borne sonne y'wrapt in Rosie lawne:
Who now awearie of his watrie bed
Off shakes the dew from his bright burnish'd head;
And with Ambrosian smile, and gentle cheare
Revives the world that wanted him whileare,
So us thine owne thou gladdest with thy birth,
The welcome-welcomst stranger upon earth;
New come into thine age, where all things smile
By peace compos'd, (that Chaos-like erewhile
Lay rude, confused) discords indigest,
Whose formelesse forme may no where be exprest.
Like as into some goodly garden plot,
That heeretofore hath her rude face forgot,
And lay an heape defac'd with filthie soile,
Oregrowne with bryars, abus'd by beastly spoile:
By Art and Nature now embellished
Smiles with a thousand daintie beauties spred,
Vaunting unto the greedie gazing eye
By Sun-rise her perfum'd embroderie.
When Mother-feared Warre, that long hath rent
The bodie of our Christian continent;
And like the in-breach of a mightie flood,
Orethrowne our houses, drown'd our streetes with blood:
Consum'd our Cities, laid our Countrie wast,
Devour'd our people, holy things defac'd:
Shall prostrate at thy foot in deep disdaine,
Lie raging bound in hundred double chaine,
Untill his heart-strings breake for fell despight,
Or his owne armes doe kil him with their weight.
Why brave Heroes yee that Eglets bee,
And high-borne sonnes of Caesars Monarchie,
Who have so oft your puissant forces tride,
Against the common foe, doe yee divide
Your selves and safeties, while ye entertaine
Huge Armies in your home-bred quarrels vaine?
Or factious Schisme that some dissentious head,
By night (his Cockle) hath dissemined?
Or erst as Suizze and Burgundie begin,
An endlesse war about an untoll'd skinne?
While Eagle Eagle cruelly pursues,
And brother brother with his bloud embrues.
If the easefull age your active spirits yrke,
Not weeting how to set your selves a worke,
Turne your keen steele against the hateful Turk.
Enough, enough, our guilt (oh gratious God)
If be thy will, hath felt thy bitter rod.
Oh turne that sword againe into his sheath
That hath so long chastised us beneath:
Let not our selves our executioners bee,
While foes are fatted with the Tragedie.
As when there beene in Erimanthus met
Two salvage Bores, with tuskes deadly whet,
Who eyther each with fiercest fury gore,
For rangership the spacious forrest ore,
Untill around the grassie velvet sted
With bloudie filth bee all discolored;
A slily lurking Lionesse beneath,
When sees them wearie, wounded, out of breath,
Leapes from her lare to arbitrate the fray,
With hungry teeth, and both become her pray.
What flood, the bloud of Christians not infects?
What Seas have not bin covered with our wrecks?
What fields not tainted with our scattered bones?
What towers not turn'd to wastful heaps of stones?
That foes are filled with the piteous view,
And Discords selfe our Misery doth rue.
But (happie Prince) thy time foretels thee peace,
And restfull dayes, with Honors large increase.
Now Germanie, and Brittanie, shall be one,
In League, in Lawes, in Love, Religion:
Twixt Dane, and English, English and the Scot,
Olde grudges (see) for ever are forgot;
The Hebrid Red shanke shall not dare too rout,
Or inland Rebell double wall'd about:
But shaftlike all one bundle, be too strong
For mightiest foe to doe the meanest wrong.
While forraine Princes from remotest shore,
Thy cradle shall by Embassies adore,
The Sun-burn'd Niger shall present thee plumes,
Sweet Arabie delicious perfumes:
Sarmatian Ister many a costly skin,
And Armenie her daintie Ermelin.
?gypt the Balme, or bloud of Myrrha's wound,
And Persis, pearles within her channels found,
With Orientall Gemmes, t'embosse arowne,
(In time perhaps) a Caesars triple crowne:
When Mother Earth shall to thee, incompell'd,
Her treasures, pleasures in abundance yeeld.
The hardie Oake shall melting honie sweat,
And bushes bend with Bacchus clusters great:
The Lion couch him by the Lambe in love,
And Eagle perch beside the gentle Dove:
The ripened graine shall yellow veile the ground,
No Serpent hurt, or harmefull hearbe bee found.
Wood-Nymphes the shadie violets shall pull,
And bring thee Lillies by whole baskets full;
Some crop the Rose, to shew thee how in graine,
That crimson, Venus bleeding hand did staine;
How from that daintie daughter of the morne,
And silken leaves, thy lovely selfe art borne:
Or Primrose, with the Kings enamell'd cup,
(Whose Nectar Phoebus early quaffeth up)
The Amaranth arraied in velvet still,
Sweet Rhododaphne, and the Daffadill:
Soft Marjoram, the yong Ascanius bed,
While Cupid kist and courted in his sted:
The fraile Anemon, Hyacinthus soft,
The Ladie-glove, Coronis weeping oft,
And whatsoever else the pleasant spring
Throwes from her bosome formost flourishing.
When Pietie no more with sword in hand
Shal need beside her smoakie Altar stand,
Or make her wonne from sight of living men
Some wastfull wood or solitary den;
But every where her holy things professe
Reside in Courts, high Heavens Embassadresse,
And as the Lilly free from cumbrous brire,
To heavenward, homeward, in her heigth aspire.
When arts, that now for nouriture doe sterve,
Or (which is worse) as common subject serve
Of scorne or pitie, to the golden Asse,
That for his Isis must adored passe,
Shall lay their rich inventions to the view,
Bee mates with Majestie and reape their dew:
Had I the tongues of Angels and of men,
An endlesse memorie, Fames golden pen,
Far I unable (Peace) were to pourtray
Thy lovely face, and downe in order lay
Those blessings which from heaven thou dost convay.
But if brave Impe, by Mars thou shalt be hent
From thy soft Pallace, to a warlike tent,
To undergoe an honourable war,
In common, or thine owne particular,
Then shine in glorious armes Heaven be thy speed,
And endlesse Fame thy everlasting meed.
Goe looke about the spacious earth, and see
The triumphs, trophees of thine ancestrie;
(Ne let thine eye on meaner Glories feed,
But imitate the best, and best exceed)
What court or coast so ere thou commest in,
There Grandsire, uncle or thy Cousins bin;
Even Envie, search thy fathers Pedigree,
From Charles, and she shall find allied to thee
Eleven Great Caesars, twentie crowned Kings,
That bloud contribute like so many springes
Into thy veines:&mdash;
Great Charlemaigne, who taught his Eagle flie,
Above the tops of loftie Pyranie:
(Bathing his plumes in stremes of Pagan blood,
From Roncevall, t' Iberos golden flood)
Subdued the Saxon, Italy did free,
From Longobards, and Gothish Tyrannie,
Subjected wholly, by an holy war,
The Hunne, the Sclave, the Sorabe, and Auar.
To that brave Lord, that held Vienne so long,
Gainst Soliman, three hundred thousand strong:
Yet all these honors, are but common, new,
To those, that by thy Mothers side accrew,
From warlike Britons, and that brave remaine
Of ancient Troie (who once as great did raigne)
Of whom discended, boldly vaunt thy birth,
Above the great'st, who ere he be on earth.
From Brute, to Brennus (and the brave Belline)
That ransackt Greece, and ore thy fertile Rhine
Victorious troupes of Britons did advance,
Sack'd perjur'd Rome, and conquered all France,
Unto Cassivelan that twice did foile,
The mightie Caesar entering this Ile.
By Aruirage, that was the Romane dread,
Till Claudius daughter afterwards did wed
To Greatest Arthur, whose immortall name,
Bright'st Glories dampes, and even amazeth Fame.
But needs me not, in infinite extent,
Draw downe these Images, or that discent
From Holy Edward, and the Saxon line,
To later Norman Ancestors of thine:
From Scottish Kings, or Denmarke, sin' they stand
So daintie limned by a later hand;
I sooner (eeke) the Lights of heaven should count,
The Ocean Sand, or if ought that surmount,
Then them or their brave deedes to viewen lay,
Or as I ought their worthinesse display.
Yet note they all be drown'd in Lethe quite,
Or thou deprived of some glorious light,
Of later times, revealing to thy view,
Our English scars, yet almost bleeding new:
Though known, and common to the world they be,
What then?  Sweet Henrie it is newes to thee.
Imagine in some goodly Gallerie,
Such as in Hampton thou maist one day see,
Who knowes not Hampton?  Mansion fitting Jove,
Or Phoebus selfe, excelling that above,
His Court of sparkie Gemmes, and Ivorie, built,
On Columnes rais'd, and by his raions guilt:
Thou to the life, their legend didst behold
On Arras, in the silke enwoven gold,
So sweetly done, by needle on the frame,
That Pallas selfe, nor Envie mought it blame:
And saw'st heere valiant Cordelion come,
Fore Acon, marching with an English Drumme,
Third Edward, there in triumph leading France,
An humble Captive to his puissance:
Forcing the faire De-luce upon her shield,
Quit the French Garden, for an English field.
Heere youthfull Edward, his victorious son,
At Poiteirs, hand to hand encountring Jon,
That haile of arrowes seeme to cloud the skie;
While English follow, and the French doe flie,
Some take that River, other yonder wood,
Which so the daintie vermill dies in blood,
Upon the silver wave, and silken greene,
As if no semblance, but the thing were seene.
There Lancaster inflicts a deadly blow
On bastard Pedro, that usurped so,
Heere Henrie Monmouths beacon gives alarme,
At Agencourt, that makes all France to arme:
And shee, there shee, whom bleeding hearts inter,
Rather then those few stones at Westminster:
Whose name, even now my ravish'd sence doth peirce,
And with sweet Nectar sprinkleth my verse,
Eliza Queene, the Maiden conqueresse,
Borne in triumphall Charriot, (I ghesse,
Like Thomyre, or that brave Semiramis)
From hundred handed Gerions defeat,
And his proud Castles fall in eightie eight.
But what shall need examples from a far;
Edge thy high courage to a glorious war
Some selfe high-priz'd Italian, Squire of France,
Instruct thee ride, and how to beare thy lance:
Or learned Lipsius, by his reading shew,
The antique practize, postures long agoe,
Of Greatest Caesar, or that haughtie Greeke,
Who other worlds bewail'd he mote not seeke;
All these, and far much more comprized bee,
In that brave ofspring, of the Orange tree,
Thy gallant Uncle (whose resounded name
Hath fill'd all eares, and spent the voyce of Fame)
Victorious Maurice, worthie bee enroll'd,
Mong those great worthies, and Heroes old,
Whose conquests earth hath bounded, thoughts and fame,
Find no dimension but the heavenly frame.
But grow sweet Infant, grow, and grow apace,
Unto thy height, in goodnesse, and in grace,
For Europe on thee gins to fixe her eye,
And note thy tender towardnesse busily.
Perhaps (somewhere) consulteth with the stars,
How thou inclinest, to laborious wars,
Or restfull peace, how milde thy government,
How long the Fatall Sisters in extent
Shall draw thy dayes, (Yee Princes Mirrors are
Reflecting your impressions as farre,
As Mountaine Beacons, or like Cedars tall,
Most eminent in flourish, or your fall)
And with thy Mothers milke, from her faire breast,
Draw those sweet vertues that therein doe nest,
Whereby her heart is dewed from above;
With gracious goodnesse, and all heavenly love:
True Pietie; the fairest vertue Gem,
That may adorne a Princes Diadem:
Best Goodnesse, that Vaine Glories foile reiects,
But rather shewes the value by effects,
That Modestie, which Majestie allaies,
Yet Royall Type, beyond it selfe doth rayse:
Her Curtesie, wherewith she leades enchain'd,
Even foes, and friends, by millions hath gain'd;
Her Bountie, mirrour of her Royall heart,
To skill, and every generous desert:
But stay my Muse, why does our ruder quill,
Attempt a taske, that craves Appelles skill?
Yet thus the Sun we view, through shadowes light;
When cannot els behold his beames bright,
And (Pearle of Princes) thus the shore I keep,
When cannot sound thy prayses Sea so deep:
Now yee who ever that shall hold in trust,
This precious jewell, and his nonage must
With tender care, and timely tendance breed,
Be vertuous guides, unto this hopefull seed:
His weaker age with all uprightnesse prop,
Untill he hath attain'd to goodnesse top:
For Infancie like unto water spilt,
Is with a finger drawen where thou wilt:
Or as an Aprill Impe that late did shoot,
From the warme bosome of its Mother root:
A thousand waies by cunning hand is taught,
To take his course, to climbe, or lie aloft,
Or clip with friendly twine the shadie bower,
That shendes true lovers, in the silver shower,
Or grow a Nymphe, that naked seemes to blush,
When white and red have clad the bloosmed bush.
Then like a rampant Lion, or to beene
A branch-horn'd Hart, or forrester in greene,
Even so this Age we worke unto our will,
Thus waxie-pliant unto good or ill.
Religion, then first ground worke lay below
Which inward though it lies, and makes least show,
All other Vertues it doth strong sustaine,
As weaker peeces resting on the maine;
This shall his life establish and assure,
Heigthen content, and make his seat secure.
Then as strong Colums, that must beare the weight,
And raise this Princely modell to his height,
Let other Vertues take their order, place.
First Temperance, that aie with goodly grace
Doth rule the mind, and with her golden bit
Curbe head-strong passion, overmaistring it:
Then Prudence, the soules eye, although she bee
Daughter of Use, and strongest Memorie,
And seldome settles in a growing braine,
Unapt her graver lesson to retaine,
But borne with fancies, like a troubled Sea,
From Card and Compasse makes contrary waie:
Acquaint him though betimely with her name,
How shee it is must his Lives Action frame,
Direct, and end; and, like that golden spray,
Lead through this Vale of wretchednesse his way,
Whose waking eyes a centinell must keepe
(Like twinkling stars) while all the world doth sleep:
Now Justice, that with her bright golden beames
Enlights the world, and calmes the state of Realmes,
Preserves the Citie, safer and more sure
Then wall of brasse, or that same triple mure,
Wherewith th' Assyrian Empresse long agone
Encompassed her mightie Babilon.
This doth adorne the Majestie of Kings
Bove every grace, and all their rarest things,
Resembling the Divine Creator right,
When borroweth from Pietie her light.
Next Clemencie, who from th' Almighties seate
Derives her linage, or by milde extreate
From Justice drawne, in readinesse doth stand,
And stretcheth out her soveraigne helping hand;
Who rankor doth of deepest wound allay,
And takes the smart of punishment away,
The Moone of Empires that with milde aspect
Doth cooly temper, graciously affect:
And as in Heaven shee; so in a Prince,
This claimes the second glorious eminence.
What worldly Empire long hath ever stood,
Whose Tyran-Scepter was distain'd with blood?
Or Prince, that long in Peace possest his state,
Whose law was will, and whom the most did hate?
This crownes with Immortalitie his Fame,
And sheds abroad, as Balme, his precious name.
The lesser Vertues let the front adorne;
And as in pleasing Parergie be worne,
Arightly teach him use of Maiestie,
The sweet effects of manly Modestie,
In speech, apparell, painting least the rind
He kils the pithie substance of the mind.
Let Pompe and Pride with those weake judgments sute,
That have no other way to winne repute:
And let him hate the name of Nigardise
The rust of Greatnesse, with base Covetise.
More Honour vanquish'd of a foe to be,
Then overcome in Liberalitie.
And that he may the better, as by line,
Run this faire course, and fowler way decline;
Oh timely teach him the abundant use
Of all good Learning, and to love the Muse,
Who gives the boundlesse Intellect her eye,
Conversing with her Maker most on high,
Who meanest doth to mightie Rule advance,
Still waging war with brutish Ignorance.
She safest with dead counsell will avise,
And guard his eare from living flatteries:
In after age she shall revive his Name,
And crowne with Honour his admired Fame.
Hence could the wisest Salomon dispute,
From the tall Cedar to the Hysope root.
Hence Caesars star did gather first her flame;
And Philips sonne, the Earths sole Lord became.
Eeke those old warriours with astondement,
That made the Earth to tremble where they went,
Those fairest flowers within their girlonds worne,
Doe owe to skill, that fram'd their mindes beforne.
That goodly fount of Grecian Eloquence,
Whose Cyrus shapes us so unmatch'd a Prince;
Themistocles that beat at Salamine
The greatest Armie that was ever seene;
Pericles, from whose powerfull accents brake
Thunder, and peircing lightning, while he spake;
Miltiades, that Marathon did staine
With bloud of hundred thousand Persians slaine;
Epaminondas, in whom liv'd and died
The Theban Glorie; those brave spirits beside
Of antique Rome (that whilome in her pride
Even Victorie held pineond, forced Mart
And drew perforce the Fates to take her part)
Were goodly learned, who will it denie?
And liv'd the fathers of Philosophie:
When rather skill the head-peice did adorne,
Then wanton plumes, that hold her now in scorne.
How often doe I meditate upon
That of Alphonsus, King of Aragon;
Avowing it the sentence of a beast,
Who said, That Princes had small interest
In Learning:  who as well may want their eyes,
Their tongues to speake, or Use to make them wise.
But neerest patterne place before thine eie,
Thy Grandsire James, our Royall Mercurie:
Who with his wand all tumult caus'd to cease,
Fulfill'd our wishes, gave our daies their peace.
Without it doe thou Greatnesse but account
That golden Calfe ador'd in Horeb mount,
Or Winter-Sun, whose beames doe feebly glance,
Wrapt in the mists of foggie Ignorance.
Oh sacred skill whose fruit (as from that tree
Of Eden) feedes us with felicitie;
And goodly branches stretch themselves so farre,
That all too weake my wit and senses are
To comprehend their compasse, as I ought,
Exceeding measure and all mortall thought!
Thrice happie me the meanest of the rest,
Were I but with her onely shadow blest!
Thus in the Circle that thou hast to run,
Display thy glory with the rising Sun:
Thus to thy Solstice, climbing by degree,
Exemplar let thy lifes whole patterne bee
To such, as from thee must derive their light
By thousands, and are dim'd without thy sight.
The winged vessell is not by her helme
So much commanded, as a potent Realme
Is by her Princes life example lead,
To frugall course, or vile unthriftihead.
Edicts, nor Axes, Prison, Tyran-law,
Doe not so much the stubborne vulgar draw,
As doth (the glasse of Honor) Innocence,
And Vertues parts, exemplar in a Prince.
Heerein they see, love, imitate, admire,
And are enkindled from his all-seene fire.
This Caesar knew, when formost did assay
Each deepest streame, to teach his troupes the way:
And that great Cato, whose command was none
By word, but his owne personall action.
No engine like to that of heartie love,
Or faire example; able sooner move
The massie Earth, then that rare Instrument
The Syracusian boasted to invent.
This is that Adamant, whose Character
Stirres up with counter-motion nigh and farre
All Hearts the Cyphars, who (conjoyntly met)
Doe turne or tarrie by her Alphabet.
Thus pious Numa over Rome did raigne,
And Salomon his peacefull Throne maintaine:
(By where Euphrates with his silver source
A thousand palmets on his shore cloth nurse)
Whose Scepters, Swords nor Armies did assure,
But justest Lawes, with lives unblam'd and pure;
When that proud Easterne Conquerour (the sonne
Of Fortune, rather then of Macedon)
Together with his father, and the rew
Of Romane Caesars that did most embrew
Their Baies in bloud, or else with hands unjust
Dealt wrong for right, or drowned lay in lust,
Out-breath'd their soules by poison at the boord,
Or suddaine fell upon a villaines sword.
This end had Nero's beastly life in fine:
Thus died Domitian, and thus Maximine.
Unhappie Pyrrhus was pursued by Fate,
On Sea and Land, unto his lives last date:
By loathsome lice Antiochus did die:
And Attalon even scorn'd of Miserie:
A Sheaperdesse sent Cyrus downe to hell:
Upon his owne swords point Cambyses fell:
And cruell Aristobulus, at last,
His heart at once up with his vomit cast.
Thus vengeance tracks the by the bloud they spilt,
Till their own mouthes gives sentence of the guilt.
Oh heavens!  to men yee give no worldly thing
More pretious then the instant pious King:
Upon whose brow we may enstamped see
The Image of the highest Majestie;
And sparkling graces, that doe sweetly shine
With something (what I know not) that's divine:
Which if themselves through filthy vice deface,
Or cursed hand attempts to cut or race,
As Traitors Heaven adjudgeth them alike;
And last or first will in avengement strike.
Oh timely let these things engraven be
Upon the tablet of thy memorie:
And thus let vertues golden linked chaine
A bracelet on thy tender wrist remaine.
So shalt thou not give thy Elector voice,
And of some mightie make the formost choice;
But raigne thy selfe more absolute and free,
An Emperour in thought and dignitie,
Then if thou shouldst with mightie arme adjoine
All Persis to thy Countie Palatine,
The Gades with Lybia, and couldst claime thine owne
What from the South been to the Arcticke knowne.
Oh that the Fates would lengthen my extent,
And let me draw so long this Element,
That I the footsteps of thy praise mought presse
In riper yeares, How should my song addresse
Thy Honours Triumphs!  not the Thracian Lyre,
That death in deepest slumber could inspire,
In stately numbers should our Muse excell,
While she did on thy loftie Glories dwell.
Then grow (sweet Infant) grow and grow apace,
And live the Phoenix of thy royall race,
For Courage, Bountie, guarded by our vowes,
Till foes thy feet, and Laurell kisse thy browes,
That Caesar Henrie thou maist one day raigne,
As good, as great, as ever Charlemaigne.
