Oh!  tell me, Critics, tell me men of letters,
Why TOMMY PINDAR should not ape his betters?
Why may'nt he warble a sublimer lay
Worthy Cecilia's or St. Stephen's Day?
Yes, he shall tempt the high caerulian road,
Strike with a fire-tipp'd fiddlestick his fiddle,
As he would saw each cat-gut through the middle,
While staring statesmen wonder at his Ode.

T'was at a feast for votes of credit won
By CHATHAM'S crafty son
The victory sate,
With joy elate,
Tho' not upon a throne:
D&mdash;DAS and W&mdash;ND&mdash;M at his side,
With GR&mdash;VILLE sate puff'd up with pride.
O!  well met!  well met!  well met!
Where so worthy a quartett?

Hard by,
Sate Laureat HARRY JEMMY PYE:
He sung, but ah, without a lyre,
Such strains as chaunt the Chapel Royal choir!
The joy began from a rebus below
Where fires with everlasting Sulphur glow;
He sung how mounting from those realms of night,
Replete with tenfold villainy, a sprite
Erst fir'd with guilt Sejanus' breast;
Next stood in Alberoni full confest;
Then clad in crimson'd robes and wig of law,
Beguil'd the Premier's Mamma,
And e'er the Moon had twice five circles whirl'd
Produc'd an image of himself, the hatred of the world.

Swollen with self, the Premier 'gan to lower,
Scowl, and assume the nod of power;
His fingers seem'd to grasp a Nation's gold,
And much he said, and much he left untold.
Applauding Nobles caught the pleasing sound,
A present Daemon echoes all around,
A present Daemon loud the vaulted roofs resound.

The Bard to vic'try next attun'd his lay:
He sung the hard-contested day
When P&mdash;TT'S, when G&mdash;NVILLE'S terror-breathing bill
Was past against the People's will;
Rejoice!  he cried, rejoice!  rejoice!
No more is heard the general voice,
Re-echo'd from all corners of the nation
Against thy mal-administration!
Now drunk with pride and wine the youth grew vain,
Spoke all his speeches o'er again,
And thrice he nonsense talk'd, and thrice he rose t' explain.

The Laureat next essay'd a strain more loud,
Dire as when thunder rends the tortur'd cloud:
Fall on, fall on, he cries,
See the Jacobins rise,
See the lances they bear,
How they flame through the air,
Whilst rebellion gleams in their eyes!
On every side surrounding squadrons see,
All firmly resolv'd to die or to be free,
In spite of thine and thee,
Lo!  they prepare to plant the hated tree!
Revenge!  revenge!  surrounding Peers exclaim,
Arise!  and vindicate our fame,
Or we must suffer, endless, endless shame!
Then P&mdash;T seiz'd a candle, the rogues to consume;
W&mdash;N&mdash;M led the way,
To guide him to his prey;
And, like another Nero, fired another Rome.

Then did the Bard another measure try,
And seem'd so mild a very PIDGEON PYE,
He sung Sir ROBERT, once so great,
Fallen, fallen, fallen, from his high estate,
Denied, upon a pinch, a Vote,
Ev'n by the very rogues he'd bought;
See him neglected and retir'd,
Scorn'd by the crew that once admir'd;
Unsooth'd by any cheering hope,
Happy in this alone &mdash; he scap'd a rope:
With bosom swelling, between fear and pity,
The Premier heard the doleful ditty;
He trembled for his actions past,
He look'd around,
In vain, for comfort, in no face he found,
All look'd like malefactors, tried and cast.

Now to a deeper and more dismal strain,
The Laureat struck the lyre again:
He chose a theme might soften rocks,
He sung the fallen Paper and the Stocks,
So amply both foretold by Mister FOX.
He sung, that credit is but vapour,
Bills and Note but scraps of paper;
Amounting, in ideal valuation,
To ten times all the money of the nation.
He sung the sorrows of finance,
When none another farthing would advance,
Though danger threats from haughty France;
Lo!  money disappears, and Commerce flies,
Whilst influence sickens, totter, falls, and dies.
Each eye was now suffus'd with woe,
All beat their breasts and tears began to flow.

The Laureat saw with joy his melting soul,
And bade the strain in sweeter numbers roll;
He tried, just tried, alas!  in vain, to move
His heart to love,
And in soft Lydian measures sung.
The nymph both handsome, rich, and young.
Quit, oh!  quit thy arduous station,
Leave to abler heads the nation;
Thou mayst split upon a rock,
Call'd a gibbet or a block!
And though the last blessings, lo!  the gods provide thee!
Thy modesty wont let thy face;
Wed the gold, whate'er betide thee.
No flush of joy the Premier's face o'erspread,
He bit his lip, and hung his head;
For Avarice and Terror shook his frame;
He lov'd the money, but he fear'd the dame.

The Bard then paus'd, asham'd to see
That proof to all the joys of love was he.
Then in a strain, pronounc'd by all divine,
Enraptur'd sung the mighty praise of wine.
Wine inspires the Statesman's brain;
Wine allays the lover's pain;
Wine can ease the guilty breast;
Wine can conscience lull to rest:
Fill the bumper, put it round!
Joys alone in wine are found.
Fill again, fill!  fill it higher,
Till your noses glow like fire;
Till each well carbuncled face
Reflects the radiance of the glass!
Quick the goblet fill again,
Carol loud the tipsy strain,
Raise the Bacchanalian roar,
Till each tongue can wag no more!

The list'ning Nobles caught the lofty sound,
Quick, and more quick the goblet passes round.
They sing, they rave, they laugh, they bawl,
As if the Devil was in them all:
Till quite o'erdone, they snore in cadence deep:
For rhyme and drink had lull'd them all to sleep.
