'Twas at the Annual Feast of PARTY, won
By HOLLAND'S spendthrift Son,
Aloft in Tavern-state
The sable Patriot sate,
On his Election Throne.
His fav'rite gulls about him plac'd:
Their garb was Blue and Buff defac'd&mdash;
So should the Fools of FOX be cas'd!

The FIEND OF FACTION by his side
Sat like a furious Poissarde Bride,
In flush of Gin, and bloody pride,
Happy, happy, happy Pair;
None but a knave,
None but a knave,
None but a knave can suit the Fair.

Sly SHERRY station'd near,
Amid the wealthy few,
Hints of Reform around him threw:
The Gallic topics charm each ear,
And daring hopes ensue.
The Tale from CROMWELL came,
Who rose with rebel aim&mdash;
Such is Ambition's tow'ring flame!
A Patriot's specious Mask disguis'd the Chief,
He seem'd to mean the State's relief,
When he had pull'd his Monarch down,
And while he trampled on the Crown;
At length he seiz'd upon th' unguarded helm,
And made HIMSELF a KING, PROTECTOR OF THE REALM.

The Ruffian Gang admire the lawless sound,
A PRESENT OLIVER!  they shout around&mdash;
A PRESENT OLIVER!  the Club-rooms all rebound.
With hope elate
The CHAIRMAN sate,
Presumes the prey,
Affects to sway,
And seems to wield the State.

Of ORLEANS, then, the Poet sung the worth,&mdash;
ORLEANS, above the narrow pride of birth&mdash;
The jovial Rake's, alas!  no more;
Yet his Shade may hover o'er,
Fancy sees the leering grace
Mantle on his rosy face,
Now roar a catch obscene.  ENCORE, Encore!
ORLEANS, scorning pride of birth,
Gallic Titles first resign'd,
ORLEANS' System is a treasure,
Lev'lling is the Patriot's pleasure:
Rich the treasure,
Great the pleasure,
Great the pleasure, Kings to bind.

Fir'd with the story, FOX grew vain,
Spoke all his Speeches o'er again,
And thrice he storm'd the Treas'ry Bench, and thrice he seem'd to reign.
The Poet saw the vapour rise,
The fulsome boasts, the specious lies,
And, while his own deserts he sung,
Chang'd the strain, and stopp'd his tongue.
He chose a recent theme,
To chace his golden dream;
He told of BRISSOT, bold and keen,
By too much thirst of sway
Fall'n, fall'n, fall'n, fall'n,
Fall'n, to stronger Rogues a prey,
Stretch'd on the Guillotine.
Disbanded in a bloody hour,
By those who shar'd his lawless pow'r,
On RETRIBUTION'S SCAFFOLD bow'd,
With not a friend among the crowd.
With mopish look the sable Leader sate,
Reflecting on his checquer'd fate,
The fickle temper of the Mob;
And now he thought on wealth and state,
And now he felt his fob.

The subtle SHERRY smil'd to see
That drinking was the next degree;
'Twas but a kindred string to clink,
For Sorrow moves the mouth to drink!
Slyly prove to wagging measures,
Now he tempts to tippling pleasures.
Politics, he sung, are trouble&mdash;
Long harangues a hackney'd bubble.
Ever striving, nought obtaining,
Plotting still, and still debating,
If thy Pension's worth the gaining,
Cease, ah!  cease, all useless prating.
Lib'ral FACTION sits beside thee,
Quaff the wine her sons provide thee.&mdash;
The Rabble raise their Bumpers for a Toast,
So FOX they drank, but SHERRY rul'd the roast.
The Chief, unable to resist the strain,
Smil'd on the tribe,
Who still subscribe,
And sip'd and smil'd, and sip'd again:
At length the drink and din his pow'rs confound&mdash;
The speechless Speaker rolls upon the ground.

Now strike the patriot string again,
A bolder yet, and yet a bolder strain;
Break his drunken trance asunder,
And rouse him like electioneering thunder.
Hark!  hark!  the cheering sound
Has brighten'd his face,
As already in Place,
And he feels for cash around.
Attack, attack, the Poet cries,
See of friends new supplies!
See the Clubs that they rear,
How they deafen the ear
With the oaths that in vollies arise!
Behold a desperate Band!
Each a bludgeon in hand!
These are swearing troops, that in polling were known;
Their characters blown,
And their votes all o'erthrown:
Give a little slang
To the active Gang.
Behold how they wave their bludgeons on high!
How they point to the Coffers of State,
And tempting Mansions of the Rich and Great!&mdash;
The Rabble now pant for the sign to rebel,
And the Chief, in a speech, rang the Minister's knell.
FACTION led the way,
To shew them all their prey,
And, like another FRANCE, to raise another HELL.
