Now gaping lacqueys wait their masters knock,
And with impatience hear the chearful cock;
Sleep now, still reigning monarch, lulls the scene,
From Hyde-Park Corner down the Mile-End Green:
Some lovers only count the tedious time,
And sing sad ditties in much sadder rhyme:
Theatrick heroes now of empire dream,
And mimick Damon sighs beside some purling stream:
One furls, or dreams she furls, a new-bought fan,
And fancy to fifteen presents a man:
Coy maids at fifty curse the fatal willow,
Whilst crowds of beaus are rival'd by their pillow:
Eas'd of his money, home each gamester steers,
And every tavern-wicket clos'd appears:
Each Black-shoe's stretch'd upon his well-known block,
And shivering watchmen cry "past three o'clock":
Cards laid aside, and company all gone,
Chloe and Betty now were left alone;
When thus the nymph, in easy chair reclin'd,
Whilst Betty waited her command behind.
With many an aukward pretty yawn exprest
These airy notions lab'ring in her breast:
Of all those arts in which our sex excel,
The chief the prettiest is coquetting well;
That art by which mankind our souls are made,
Which baffles all their reason's boasted aid.
Happy the nymph, who knows her charms to prize,
Who with unmeaning softness rolls her eyes,
Whilst at each turn some foolish gazer dies.
How vain, and how fantastical is man,
Dependent on the cracking of a fan!
I love to see the creature rave and stare,
To me 'tis perfect comedy, I swear.
Berhym'd all o'er by many a love-sick swain,
Whilst crowds unnumber'd gladly fill my train,
Insensible to all alike I give
My charms, whilst they by my permission live:
Each takes his turn; now Sylvio, Daphnis woos,
One sighs in metre, on in billetdeux;
I take them all, the prose perhaps I tear,
But keep the poetry &mdash; to curl my hair&mdash;
Here, Betty, take my cap &mdash; ha &mdash; how you move!
I hope you don't pretend to be in love&mdash;
No, really maem, I know much better things,
'Tis only fit for girls in leading-strings;
I hope, maem, I have never giv'n you cause
To think I was (here Betty made a pause&mdash;
For Bellmour's footman Thomas, you must know,
Had struck the wench's fancy long ago;
Cou'd hum a tune or two, talk smart and witty,
And swore her mistress was not half so pretty.)
True (she proceeds) Tom, when he brings you letters,
Will tell me I'm as handsome as my betters;
Yet does it follow I must love the fop?
Here Chloe gap'd, and Betty made a stop.
Chloe had hitherto with patience heard
Her chattering maid, nor answer'd her a word;
At looking-glass engag'd, she smiles, she stares,
And 'gainst to-morrow practices new airs.
Betty enrag'd at breath so thrown away,
Restraint no longer on her tongue cou'd lay;
But thus proceeds:  I cannot, for my soul,
See the great harm in love upon the whole;
Nay, and I know some folks, for all their railing,
Who sometimes may be caught, like others, failing;
Last night when Bellmour look'd on lady Grace,
How flush'd the colour in some people's face!
"This table &mdash; how it stands &mdash; well, 'tis no wonder,
Thomas that fool must always have his blunder;
Here, Betty, take this candlestick away,
I'm crouded so I scarce have room to play:
This chair too &mdash; is &mdash; how aukwardly it stands&mdash;
Did ever mortal hold such wretched hands?"
These words, in pretty mimickry exprest,
Awak'd the woman in her mistress' breast;
When up she starts &mdash; cease, hold your saucy prate,
To name the creature whom you know I hate;
Bellmour, that silly, vain, that ugly creature,
To hear him mention'd shocks my very nature&mdash;
Was ever mortal curs'd with such a maid&mdash;
You saucy hussey you &mdash; no more she said,
But in a passion flounces into bed.
Affrighted Betty dar'd to speak no more,
But tuck'd her up, stole off, and shut the door.
