Majestic Form!  of noblest mien,
Whom ardent Britons most revere,
Here still with all thy charms serene
In native dignity appear!
Ever reside, inspiring Maid,
Beneath thy Oak's protecting shade;
Though round it storms impetuous blow,
Its firm tenacious roots below,
The howling tempest still defy:
Though clouds obscure the low'ring sky,
Again the Sun unveils his golden beams,
And o'er th' enlighten'd plains the swift effulgence streams.

Blest Tree!  Britannia's darling care,
Still o'er the proudly swelling wave,
Her dauntless Sons to conquest bear,
(Freedom's peculiar rights to save;)
Their Names, with Truth's encircling rays,
On Glory's dazzling Records blaze,
And with the deathless laurel join'd,
Still be the Oaken Wreath entwin'd,
Pacific Virtue's graceful meed,
To soft Humanity decreed,
In whose mild bosom glow those social fires,
That prompt to generous deeds, which patriot zeal inspires.

From Realms that various climates boast,
Obedient to thy voice divine,
Goddess!  behold the mingled Host,
In thy awak'ning Cause combine:
On fair Italia's classic shore,
Her ruthless Spoiler fled, once more
See them the peaceful Olive raise.
Resounding to thy sacred praise,
Soon may Helvetia's mountains ring,
With notes that every breeze shall bring,
Wafted to level Belgia's wat'ry plain,
While Echo, pleas'd, repeats the rapture-breathing strain!

See the Austrain Eagle plume
His daring wing!  with conscious pride
His wonted energy resume,
And on the winds triumphant ride?
No longer "quench'd in slumber, lie
The lightning's" of his piercing eye;
Aloft his stately crest he rears,
Jove's awful Bolt his talon bears;
Avenging Justice marks the way,
Where'er his rapid pinions play,
And as he cleaves the yielding sky,
See pale Oppression's "faded form" before him fly!

Where Day's red Orb, with parting glow,
Sinks blushing in the Western main,
Hear'st thou that direful sound of woe,
The clank of that terrific chain?
Oh, Liberty!  thy friendly sail,
Unfurl to the auspicious gale;
Haste to impart to Afric's clime
Thy long-wish'd influence sublime;
And may the Genius of our Isle,
Favour'd by Heav'ns approving smile,
To distant scenes fair Freedom's gifts convey,
Diffusing gladness round, like the bright Solar Ray!
