When PARTY, fiend of Gallic race,
Resolv'd to force her friends in place,
The PASSIONS, at her potent yell,
Rush'd from out their gambling Hell,
Professing, scorning, fawning, swearing,
Absurd beyond the Senate's bearing.
By turns they rais'd the hackney'd strain,
Empty, pompous, bold, and vain;
Till at the last when all were wild,
Stung by want, by France beguil'd,
From the Conductors at the helm
They seiz'd the stations of the Realm;
And as they oft with specious snare
Had govern'd in a Club-Room Chair,
Each, for pride possess'd the hour,
Would fix his own presiding pow'r.

First TOOKE in hopes of master rule,
The wond'rous code of France proclaim'd;
But fell while thinking all to fool,
E'en by the Mob himself inflam'd.

Next T&mdash;, stung with Party heat,
Aspir'd at Legislative sway;
By one bold push he gain'd a Seat,
And strait began to prate away.

With fretful fervour L&mdash;,
Loud swelling taunts his Speech prolong,
A furious, wild, and motley tale,
'Twas sense by chance, by will 'twas wrong.

But thou, oh!  G&mdash;, with hollow air,
What was thy delusive teaching,
Still he for Reform was preaching&mdash;
And bade the hideous wreck in Gallia hail!
Still would his spleen the theme renew,
And for the Stocks, the Hulks, the Jail&mdash;
He suffrage claim'd for all the Rabble Crew;
And where he urg'd his wildest scheme,
A loud anarchic shout approv'd the desp'rate dream,
And G&mdash; besotted heard, and gaz'd with ghastly glare.

And longer had he spoke, but with a frown,
S&mdash;, with frantic scream,
His British title dash'd indignant down,
And, with a savage look,
The Gaul-announcing Cit's he took,
And gave so wild and fierce a roar,
Were ne'er barbaric howl so full of rage,
And ever and anon he prais'd
The hideous Storm by GALLIA rais'd,
And though at times each Speaker's din between,
Heroic MORRIS 'gan to twang
His mob-delighting ballad slang;
Yet still he kept his stern, unsocial mien,
While drops of deadly bile seem'd oozing from each pore.

Thy Speeches, L&mdash;, nothing plainly told,
Old JESUIT Traps for catching Geese,
O'er various themes the long oration roll'd,
And now it menac'd War, now slyly proffer'd Peace.

In drowsy mood, as one half-drunk,
Dull N&mdash; in the Chair was sunk,
But rousing slow, with stupid stare,
In language Fools alone could bear,
Drawl'd from his clumsy tongue a senseless Toast&mdash;
"OUR SOV'REIGN!  viz. &mdash; THE MOB," went round&mdash;

Rabble thousands shout the sound:
The noise and nonsense of the motley host
To ev'ry neighbouring street imparts dismay,
All on GALLIA'S deeds declaiming,
Love of change, and Systems framing,
With drunken yellings of huzza!!

But oh!  what barb'rous accents grate the ear,
When F&mdash;, a Wight of Scottish breed,
His notions form'd on France's Creed,
Preach'd a Reforming Cant confus'd and crude,
The Club-room trash to Fool and Ruffian dear.
UNITED WHIGS and IRISH o'er him lean,
The Corresponding Bands are seen,
Pouring from COPENHAGEN GREEN.
There THELWALL gave in assenting growl,
And JONES rush'd forth, and rush'd with ideot howl.
Last came F&mdash;'s subtle prating,
He in Blue and Buff appearing,
First to the Rabble Herd his Speech addrest,
But smil'd upon some senseless Nobles waiting,
Whose high voluptuous state he lik'd the best.
They have declar'd, who heard the rant,
They saw from Drury's holes a ruffian crew,
Among the weak deluded few,
By some infernal Prompter steering,
While as his dang'rous doctrines forth he flung,
Rogue join'd with Fool, in wild tremendous sound,
Rais'd were their Bludgeons seen, their Gangs around,
And he, amidst his daring Speech,
As if he would to all Confusion preach,
Dealt bolder mischiefs from his wily tongue.

Oh!  PARTY, Hell-begotten jade,
Tool of Faction, Plunder's aid,
Why, Monster!  why to us advance?
Think'st thou of aught but genial France?
As in that sad degraded land,
You rule with all-oppressing hand,
Thy hideous soul, oh!  Fiend accurst,
Can there allay its bloody thirst.
What is thy daring empty claim,
Vaunting of Freedom, Genius, Flame?
Alike as in thy former state,
Pert, perfidious, mean, elate!
Thy actions in this woeful age
Fill a detesting world with rage.
'Tis said, and oh!  too truly said,
Thy Guillotine more havoc made,
Had more of horror, mis'ry, gore,
Than all that shock'd the world before;
E'en all at once tremendous shows
Hist'ry's collected mass of woes.
Oh!  still may all thy arts be vain
To tempt BRITANNIA'S loyal train;
Secure in Freedom's temper'd sway,
Resolv'd to guard her and obey.
