While Phoebus claspt his Thetis in his Arms,
Revell'd in Joy, and languish'd o'er her Charms;
While yet Aurora past in Love away
The short Remains of Night, nor thought of Day:
FOXCHACE arose, and blam'd the ling'ring Sun
That he forgot his daily Course to run:
His Bride he left; and to her soft Embrace
Preferr'd the rude Companions of the Chace.
To him the opening Hounds more grateful prove,
Than the soft gentle Blandishments of Love:
To him th' impatient Coursers as they neigh,
More Pleasure than the sweetest Sighs convey;
To him the lowly Dales, or cliffy Rocks,
The worthless Hare, or far more worthless Fox,
Than downy Rest a greater Joy bestow,
And Extacies more strong than Love can know.
&mdash;Still may'st thou follow Beasts, and never prove
The Charms of Beauty, and the Joys of Love.

Wak'd from her Lover's Arms the sullen Morn
Low'ring comes on and hates the ecchoing Horn:
Full as unkind the Sun begins to rise,
But with no chearful Beam he glads the Skies;
From the Hills Tops he casts athwart the Plain
A misty Cloud, and threatens future Rain:
Not to the threat'ning Day will FOXCHACE yield;
Not to inviting Love, but takes the Field.

While from their Couples they unloose the Hounds;
While with their Cries each Vale and Hill resounds;
FOXCHACE is by EUGENIO led aside,
Who censures thus his Coldness to his Bride.

EUGENIO.
Oh!  How, mistaken Youth, can you approve
Of this mean Chace, and leave the Chace of Love?
Why here with dull Fatigue a Beast pursue,
And quit that pleasing Toil, whose Joys are true?

FOXCHACE.
Of Joy a different Notion all possess,
And I may fly what others wou'd caress:
In Love, as in the Fields, the Pleasure's gone
Soon as we once have made the Prize our own.

EUGENIO.
To Nature, Beauty, and to Love a Foe,
Why did kind Nature upon thee bestow,
A beauteous Form to fire the coldest Heart,
Yet to thy own not the least Warmth impart?
Fresh as the lusty Spring in Woods you rove;
Dull as the Winter's Cold you droop in Love:
To Woods, to Beasts awhile, oh!  bid adieu,
And greater Joys and nobler Game pursue.

FOXCHACE.
The rural Sports are with set Seasons past;
But Marriage through the live-long Year will last.
Sure, when I will, I may my Wife obtain;
But my Lord's Hounds may never come again.

EUGENIO.
Degrading Youth, can you to them compare
A Nymph so young, so lovely, and so fair;
Fresher and sweeter than the Rose new blown,
Softer and whiter than the old Swans Down:
For whom the proudest Courtier, humblest Swain,
Whene'er they see her sigh, but sigh in vain:
Leave, leave the Woods, leave following Beasts, and prove,
Cold Youth, more gentle far, and follow Love.

FOXCHACE.
Tho' lovely, fair, and young my Bride may be,
Her Charms which others please, are lost on me:
To make the Match our Fathers did combine,
Because her Lands just border'd here on mine;
But as for Love whose Praises you proclaim,
It's a mad Fancy, nothing but a Name:
For all Mankind just as their Passions sway,
In Search of Pleasure take a different Way:
In some a Love for Ladies most abounds,
Misers prize most their Gold, I most my Hounds:
I was by Nature made through Woods to rove,
Form'd for the Chace, but ne'er design'd for Love.

EUGENIO.
Through all her Works a Proof kind Nature brings,
That 'tis from Love the whole Creation springs;
Look, too rude, rural, Youth, look round about,
And all that's fair above or good below,
Of Love the Power and the Pleasure show;
The Sun on th' Earth sheds all his genial Beam,
And with a kindly fruitful Birth she teems:
The smallest Bird that 'mong yon Branches sings,
And warbles sweet, and nimbly plays his Wings;
Sporting from Tree to Tree, from Grove to Grove,
Chaunts to his Mate, and glad records his Love:
His Mate in gentle Song returns his Flame,
And in alternate Notes they both their Loves proclaim:
Even the Hare and Fox whom you pursue,
Foe to their am'rous Joys, are Lovers too;
And all the Art they show, to shun their Fate,
Is not lest Life they lose, but lose their Mate:
Leave, leave the Woods, leave following Beasts, and prove
Rash Youth, more gentle far, and follow Love.

FOXCHACE.
&mdash;Follow the Dogs, lo!  there a Scent they gain;
The panting Coursers up the Hills shall strain,
Then sweep a down the Sides and skim along the Plain.

Away he spurr'd his Horse and swift as Wind
He bounds along, and leaves his Friend behind;
More glad still after Beasts through Woods to rove,
Than all the Charms enjoy of Beauty and of Love.
