The feast was spread beneath the civic dome,
And many a gay one, that had been entreated,
With empty entrails quitted shop and home,
To have both appetite and honour sated.
Oh, such a throng as that day, so dated,
Their way towards its noble entrance found
Was never likened, save (as 'tis related)
When Noah erst sent invitations round
To all the beasts, before the flood, that lived upon the ground.

Indeed the parallel is very fair,
To say this dome another ark appeared:
The Sea-horse Clarence, and the Land Lord Mare,
(The Prince of Whales being now no more, I heard,)
In Peacock plumes how many a beau was gear'd,
What crowds of City Stags with antlered brows,
Beside their dears, who evidently feared
The Jackall courtiers that came to the carouse,
Should not sufficiently distinguish every spouse.

How many an Aldermanic ass was there,
And Camel scribe, with dinner conversant
Say once a week, while ardent for the fare,
What rakish Pointers always on the scent;
Some Lawyer Wolves, and Statesmen Snakes had beat
Their courses thither, while some witty Gnats
With Hedgehog critics, their appearance lent
With sweetheart ring-doves, and with scolding Cats,
To help diversify this motley crowd that sat.

Lo, at its head see Lucas!  many a brighter man
May sit around him, but there cannot be
Throughout the rooms produced a lighterman
With half the gravity in him we see.
Accustomed to transport, his enemy
Must say through life, he's been a man of few ill,
One that's promoted many a glow, so we
Should deem him for his deeds a kind of jewel,
The value of whose black diamonds we long since knew well.

See at his right the heir apparent sits,
With every air apparent of his station,
And on his left, (opposed to him) those wits
Called Whigs, with false airs for th' occasion.
A goodly specimen of Cabinet fashion,
Lansdowne and Huskisson, Burdett and Brougham,
Strictly attending to their avocation,
By setting down to a raise a mighty fume
Among the crowd, that worth and Whiggery were in the room.

The feast was spread beneath the civic dome,
And rich and tempting did, in it array
Of solids and of fluids, well become
The taste of those that managed the display.
Far different views on that important day,
No doubt, did influence the crowd that met,
Some came to hear what others had to say,
But more, perhaps, to see what they could eat
And swallow, rather than bring up what would be termed a treat.

Ah, who that gaz'd on that destructive scene
Will ever let the recollection pass
Of the dire fray which gourmands waged, I ween,
Of meat, the .slicing, and the charge &mdash; of glass.
No one, I'm sure, but some romantic ass,
Who hates a dinner's want of sentiment,
Would deem that scene without some interest, 'twas
A field for speculation on the extent
Of man's receptive and digestive tenement.

The fray is past, an awful calm succeeds,
And blood-red wine, while flowing all around,
Betokens, with short breathing, that the deeds
Of every visitor have been profound.
The ear is now enlivened with the sound
Of melody, and then with that of speech;
Something much harder to digest that's found
(Tho' much less solid) than the dishes, which
Of taste, and sense, were matters notwithstanding, each.

Above their heads a canopy was hung,
O'ershadowing a splendid chandelier,
Which, formed like Hope upon an anchor, swung
In compliment to royalty, so near.
Now when the cry went round of "Hear, hear, hear,"
At what the lordly Lansdowne had to say,
And he had risen proudly at the cheer,
The Whiggish wish of hearers to obey,
The light descended on his head, and drove his thoughts away.

Auspicious omen &mdash; most prophetic fact,
Just as the wily Whig began to speak,
With studied sophisms and colloquial tact,
Of troth and principle some show to make,
While all around him sat prepared to take,
After their meal, an olive or a song;
The light, opposed to every word he spake,
Refused its office, and declared him wrong,
By cutting short the accents of his tongue.

The anchor weighed on royal Clarence' head.
But not at his command, which seem'd to say
Our country's ship outrides no storms, if, 'stead
Of truth, she anchors by what must give way:
Hope also, that had hung in colours gay
Before their eyes, fell shattered to the ground,
Once beautiful, but now in ruins, &mdash; they
In this another sober warning found,
That all the Hopes of Whiggery are brittle and unsound.

Here ends my tale:  'twere needless to de-tail
The scene of strange confusion this occasioned,
How some inclined to wine began to ail,
Cut by the glass they'd stuck to, quite impassioned;
How many a temper naturally rough-fashioned
Was oiled into submissive  resignation,
And many a goose well basted with a dash on't;
Yet how that all was riot and vexation,
A scene of soiled gowns, muck, and tribulation.

Yet, gentle Lucas, be not thou deprest,
Dame Fortune should have proved to thee so fickle,
That on the day you wish'd to treat each guest
With ev'ry sweet, you put them in a pickle.
There's one thing must continue thee to tickle,
However distant be thy dying hour,
That tho' to mirth this fall proved  an ob-sticle,
At no Lord  Mayor's  proud feast the light before
Broke in upon the company's brains with so much power.
