On Avon's bank, beside an aged tree,
Whose pensile branches form'd a verdant shade;
What time the scatter'd herds to shelter flee,
And cooling zephyrs steal across the mead,
A swain reclin'd &mdash; neglected lay his reed,
That erst had whil'd the melancholy hour:
Alas!  his youth to sorrow seem'd decreed;
Pathetic emblem of a tender flow'r,
Which early promis'd fair, but sinks beneath the show'r.

Sable his garb, whose simple folds conceal'd
A figure elegant, disdaining art;
Grave too his countenance, that well reveal'd
How much he suffer'd from affliction's dart:
Still, animation did his eye impart,
And honour dwelt upon his pensive brow;
With openness, and constancy of heart;
A heart, though deeply touch'd, unspoil'd by woe;
O'ershadow'd, not extinct, its philanthropic glow.

Day's golden lamp had now that point attain'd
Where earth appears to meet the bending sky;
In fullest orb, some moments he remain'd,
More beautiful, than when he sent from high
Meridian beams &mdash; thus ever we descry
New fascination in departing friends:
Perhaps this thought impels a gentle sigh,
Which from the mourners swelling breast ascends,
As, with the western breeze, his plaintive voice be blends.

"Thou, glorious sun!  that dost in pomp decline,
With renovating morn wilt gladly rise;
But not for me, thy lucid rays will shine,
Creation's charms no longer I can prize:
I love her best when gloomy is her guise,
Since then the aspect of my soul she wears,
And in its feeling seems to sympathize;
For ah!  to faithful mem'ry it adheres,
Contrasting with the past, the future joyless years.

"Thou, blue expanse!  on which mild Cynthea play'd,
When, by affection cheer'd, I wander'd here;
And, lovelier from her gaze, the scene survey'd,
Art now, as then, serene and glassy clear:
Unchang'd my rural dwelling doth appear,
No busy sound disturbs the gen'ral rest;
The dashing oar alone breaks on mine ear;
Each tuneful bird hath gain'd its downy nest;
Peace breathes on all around, but visits not my breast.

"Ah!  what imports a plenteous fortune now!
To my fond wish, could it restore my love,
The splendid gift, at distance I would throw,
And thankfully in humblest station move:
Then I, revolving seasons, might improve;
Nor would my former state engage a thought;
With her, more dear a hut in yonder grove,
Than any habitation riches brought,
When, in their empty joys, I transient pleasure sought."

He turn'd, unknowing that his voice had led
To the sequester'd place, a rev'rend sire;
Confusion o'er his features quickly spread,
While from his trembling lips the words retire.
And solely, did th' unlook'd for guest conspire
To tinge his pallid cheek?  Truth bids me name,
The consciousness he should more strength acquire;
Nor thus, however virtuous were his flame,
Allow it to precede a far superior claim.

Thus, (disregarding th' Omnipresent eye,
And awful frown, that only can avail,)
We oft repose in false security,
'Till shame the dormant conscience doth assail;
So impotent is man, so very frail!
With some, to cause emotion is to feel;
Of such a class, the stranger of my tale;
In him, all human kind excited zeal;
Pity in noble form &mdash; solicitous to heal.

"Oh!  thou," he cried, "who daringly accuse
A lenient Providence, which cannot err,
Awake, at duty's call, to higher views;
Forsake not thus, the Christian character!
Oh!  rather, to content, thy doubts transfer.
What though thy way be rugged!  'tis the road
Thy Saviour trod &mdash; no longer then demur,
Awake!  reflect, whatever be thy load,
The heart can never fail, whose trust is flx'd on God!"

"Father!  thou warnest well," the youth replied,
And sweet compassion modulates thy tone;
Methinks, in thee, I safely might confide;
Yet, much rever'd consoler, hadst thou known
The bitter pangs, my bosom fain would own,
Thou could'st not reason thus &mdash; still let me pay
A debt to kindness due; nor that alone;
Oh!  let me promise, wheresoe'er I stray,
To banish discontent, and Heav'n's decrees obey."

"False thy surmise," rejoin'd his conscious friend,
(And, as he spake, a momentary cloud
Pass'd o'er his brow,) "the woes that man attend,
I've not escap'd &mdash; yet He, to whom I bow'd,
Proportionable fortitude bestow'd:
Then, reassur'd, draw near the Fount of Grace,
Whence streams of mercy have for ages flow'd!
In thy late words, reviving Faith I trace,
Hail her returning smile, and it will bring thee peace!

"Go, seek the cot, where misery prevails,
With lib'ral hand, dispense thine ample store;
With patience, listen to their honest tales,
And mitigate th' affliction of the poor;
Thus will thy sorrow find a comfort sure:
Nor, e'en to 'waken'd guilt, deny thine aid;
Remember One, beyond all mortals pure;
Who never contrite sinner did upbraid,
But, to reclaim his steps, the tend'rest means essay'd.

"And may humility thy bounties screen,
Inseparable link of Charity:
Her look is ever modest and serene,
Alike from pride, and ostentation free:
So unobtrusive, that you scarcely see,
Excepting in its deeds, her placid form;
Save in the hour of dark calamity,
When, glancing heavenward, and justly warm,
With courage quite her own, she braves the threat'ning storm.

"Inviting nature too, thou may'st explore;
Say, not, unfelt by thee, her charms arise:
Contemplate, and ere long thou must adore;
Her simplest work, a theme for praise supplies.
God reigns not only in the lofty skies,
His wondrous skill is manifest around;
Th' inspiring search, forbear then to despise;
Go!  ramble where true pleasures may be found
Nor, coldly, turn aside from friendship's wishful sound!

"If not so dear as love, she is as sure;
And most attaching, when our prospects low'r:
All, but estrangement, she can well endure;
Try, and thou soon wilt prove her healing pow'r!
Peruse, with her, the page of ancient lore;
Know, idleness of virtue is the bane;
Haste then, retrieve the past neglected hour;
'Twas for exertion, that thy mind was giv'n,
My son!  abuse no more, the choicest gift of Heav'n!"

Died, in the air, his words &mdash; not so the pray'r
Devoutly breath'd &mdash; for, won by piety,
His auditor, henceforth subduing care,
To its Assuager bent the grateful knee:
Nor slighted he th' engaging sympathy,
His friends evinc'd &mdash; upward he nature trac'd;
And often stole unnotic'd to supply
The poor man's wants; thus, his own grief he chas'd,
While, to a Sov'reign Cause, each righteous act he plac'd.
