Hah!  not a breath of Wind!  No gentle Breeze
To fan the darksome Gloom! &mdash; No ruffled Wave
Disturbs this silent Port of Life, nor moves
The sleeping Calm; a death-like Silence reigns.
Those Storms of Wrath, that oft, by Tyrants breath'd,
Have shook the trembling World, now die away
In Whispers lost; the Froth of heighten'd Pride
Beats on the Rocks, and beats itself to nothing.
The Pomp of Kings, the panegyric Breath
Of soothing Flatterers and menial Crowds,
The Voice of Slander, the destructive Blasts
Of Envy self-distracting, softly seem
(Like dying Thunders in a distant Cloud)
Gently to vanish from th' attentive Ear.

DEATH, rigid DEATH, impartially declares
That Man is nothing, but an heap of Dust
Clay-cold, insensible.  Wipe from thy Cheek
O Man, the soft, emasculating Tear,
For dye thou must:  just as by Nature Streams
In silver Mazes roll their easy Tide,
A Tribute to the Main; thus art thou born
A short-liv'd Glory, pre-ordain'd to dye.
The Thought of Obsequies, Convulsions, Groans,
'Tis that distracts thy Soul:  The Kiss of Death
Is soft, and harmless:  Golden Rest attends it,
And soon dissolves the fretful Dream of Life.
Nature's great Law, is death. &mdash; As rising Flames
Seek their congenial Place, and mount to Heav'n,
Thus haste we to our End; the Bloom of Youth
Expels our infant Years, then hoary Age
Encroaches on the Man, and shuts the Scene.

Alas!  th' impartial Grave no diff'rence yields
'Twixt King and Peasant.  Where's the Monarch now?
Fast by the Tyrant sleeps the the Tyrant's Slave.
What Lustre now attends the Head, that bore
The regal Crown enchas'd with India's Pearl?
What Machiavel, or what Sejanus, here,
Rules with a Nod, or with a Whisper kills?
What Cheek impurpled with a rosy Blush
Views with the new-born Glories of the Morn?
Ah!  where's Lucinda, and that beauteous Form
Which boasted once a Paradise of Charms?
Alas!  she's mingled with the vulgar Dust,
Close to what most she fear'd, Deformity;
(The Life, Warmth, Softness, Fragrance of her Beauty
Dissolv'd and molder'd into putrid Earth,
And Worms impure) her once enchanting Voice
Is vanish'd into Air, and O adieu
The dear enliv'ning Smile, and melting Eye
That stream'd with sparkling Lustre, now no more!
Black-rob'd CONFUSION shades the gloomy Void
With Raven-wings, and scatters Indistinction.
Cease Mortal then to boast thy transient Charms
A Prey to Worms; in vain the Glass reflects
A well-proportion'd Harmony of Parts,
If thou must rot in Earth a Corpse obscene.

Pow'r, Wealth, and Beauty are a short-liv'd Trust,
'Tis VIRTUE only blossoms in the Dust.
