O Louse!  by plastic Nature form'd to climb,
And with ambitious Feet ascend the Heighth,
Where Reason sits enthron'd; o'er Reason Thou
Supreme, in loftier Region Monarch reign'st.
Thee oft, the loit'ring School Boy seems to feel;
Thee, with rude Shrug, he labours to unhouse
From porous Cell, where, nestling, close and warm,
Thou hear'st without the Elemental Strife
Of Wind and Rain, and safe, enjoy'st the Storm.
Thee too the Taylor, with his o'er grown Nails,
Sharpen'd by Rage, in hostile Mode attacks,
He digs thy deep Intrenchments, earthy Mounds
Around thee cast; weak Fence!  he topples down
Thy labour'd Works; where thou o'er-whelm'd awhile,
New Strength resum'st, and off the cumbrous Load
Heav'st from thy Back, emerging into Light.
Again thou call'st him to the War, again
He foiled, gnaws his Lip in bitter Rage.
But ah!  sad Fate of War!  if Captive ta'en,
Th' insulting Victor on th' Ivory Plain
Of massy Thumb-nail crack thy tender Nerves,
While his Compeers the Topaean grin.
But thou far safer Dwelling often find'st
In Poet's languid Wig, where lank Hairs hang
Their drooping Heads, of want the dreadful Sign.
What though he wants, thou want'st not:  From his Brain,
Warm'd by Poetic Fire, Phoebus's Gift
Stream Fumes unbodied; thou on purest Food,
As Aether soft, as spicy Fragrance sweet,
Luxurious Banquet mak'st:  No Dread of Bill,
Of creeping Catch pole, thy keen Stomach palls.
Nor yet ungrateful thou; nor should the Bard
Repent his Loan:  For when by wicker Light,
Or paly Lustre of a glimmering Lamp,
Darkling he sits, enwrapt in dubious Thought;
Whether the Triumphs of the bleeding Field,
In Ode Pindaric, or in Epic Song,
Were best rehears'd; or if the softer Theme,
Of bloodless Conquests wrought by Laura's Eye:
His Mind employ, Wit, Sense, and Language droop,
Till thy importunate Bite Attention wakes:
By Scratches soon the slumbering Thoughts are rous'd
Rush headlong down, and spread the Paper plain;
Thee absent, strait Inventions Powers flag,
From hard-squeez'd Brain the slow Ideas drip.
