Where, 'midst the ruins of a fallen state,
The once fam'd Tiber rolls his scanty wave,
Where half a column now derides the great,
Where half a statue yet records the brave;

With trembling steps an Exile wander'd near,
In Scottish weeds his shrivell'd limbs array'd;
His furrow'd cheek was cross'd with many a tear,
And frequent sighs his wounded soul betray'd.

Oh!  Wretch!  he cry'd, that like some troubled ghost
Art doom'd to wander round this world of woe,
While memory speaks of joys for ever lost,
Of peace, of comfort, thou hast ceas'd to know!

These are the scenes, with fancy'd charms endow'd,
Where happier Britons, casting pearls away,
The tools of sound, of empty trifles proud,
Far from the land of bliss and freedom stray.

Wou'd that, for yonder dome, these eyes could see
The wither'd oak that crowns my native hill!&mdash;
These urns let ruin waste; but give to me
The tuft that trembles o'er its lonely rill.

Oh!  sacred haunts!  and is the hillock green
That saw our infant sports beguile the day?
Still are our seats of fairy fashion seen?
Or is my little throne of moss away?

Had but Ambition, in this tortur'd breast,
Ne'er sought to rule beyond the humble plain,
Where mild dependence holds a vassal blest,
Where faith and friendship fix the chieftain's reign;

Thus had I liv'd the life my fathers led;
Their name, their family, had not ceas'd to be;
And thou, Monimia!  on thy earthy bed!&mdash;
My name, my family, what were these to thee!&mdash;

Three little moons had seen our growing love,
Since first Monimia join'd her hand to mine;
Three little moons had seen us blest above
All that enthusiast hope cou'd e'er divine.

Urg'd by the brave, by fancy'd glory warm'd,
In treason honest, if 'twas treason here,
For rights suppos'd, my native band I arm'd,
And join'd the standard Charles had dar'd to rear;

Fated we fought, my gallant vassals fell,
But sav'd their master in the bloody strife;
Their coward master, who cou'd live to tell
He saw them fall, yet tamely suffer'd life.

Let me not think &mdash; but ah!  the thought will rise,
Still in my whirling brain its horrors dwell,
When pale and trembling, with uplifted eyes,
Monimia faintly breath'd a last farewell!

"They come, she said; fly, fly these ruthless foes,&mdash;
And save a life, in which Monimia lives;
Believe me, Henry, light are all her woes,
Except what Henry's dreaded purpose gives.

"And would'st thou die, and leave me thus forlorn,
And blast a life the most inhuman spare?
Oh!  live in pity to the babe unborn
That stirs within me to assist my prayer!&mdash;"

What could I do?  contending passions strove,
And press'd my bosom with alternate weight,
Unyielding honour, soft persuasive love&mdash;
I fled and left her &mdash; left her to her fate!

Fast came the ruffian band; no melting charm,
That e'er to suffering beauty Nature gave,
The ruthless rage of Party can disarm;
Thy tears, Monimia, wanted pow'r to save.

She, and the remnant of her weeping train,
Whose faithful love still link'd them to her side,
Torn from their dwelling, trod the desert plain,
No hut to shelter, and no hand to guide.

Thick drove its snow before the wintry wind,
And midnight darkness wrapp'd the heath they past,
Save one sad gleam, that, blazing far behind,
The antient mansion of my father's fast.

Calmly she saw these mouldering ruins glare;
"'Tis past, all righteous God!  'tis past, she cry'd;
But for my Henry hear my latest pray'r!"&mdash;
Big was her bursting heart &mdash; she groan'd, and died!&mdash;

Still, in my dreams, I see her form confess'd
Sailing, in robes of light, the troubled sky!&mdash;
And soon, she whispers, shall my Henry rest&mdash;
And dimly smiling, points my place to die!

I hear that voice, I see that pale hand wave!
I come once more to view my native shore;
Stretch'd on Monimia's long neglected grave,
To clasp the sod, and feel my woes no more!
