Go forth, adventurous portions of my song!
Snatch'd from a cadence of connected strain,
That, yet imperfect, hastens on, ere long
Its destin'd form and harmony to gain.
Proceed ye links!  tho' sever'd from the chain
That best their moral with high deeds may bind.
Pluck'd from your just dependence on the train
Of fair proportion to my lay assign'd,
Ye yet may show the strain that rests unsung behind.

His eye the Hunter turning to the clouds,
Knows at a glance the towering Eagle's flight,
Ere the swift course of rolling volumes shrouds
At once the lofty soarer from his sight:
The woodman knows the Owl, at fall of night
Seen for a moment sailing down some glen:
Nor, closely thro' embowering leaves unite
To shade her flitting, can the little wren
Deceive in twilight groves the homeward School-boy's ken.

Let but one cluster from the vine distil
Its luscious tears, its raciness is scann'd:
A little water, from the bubbling rill,
Scoop'd in the hasty hollow of the hand,
Resolves at once the traveller's demand,
If pure the well to which his thirst applies.
Whate'er in Nature soft, or fair, or grand,
Calls on the soul with it to sympathise,
At once effects its end:  one glance will oft suffice.

So in the world of intellect, one beam
Pour'd from the source divine of mental day,
Makes glad the gifted souls; and like the stream
Of light and warmth that flows with morning's ray,
Sheds bright and cheering influence on its way.
Thrice happy they, who, fated to dispense
The finest fire that animates our clay,
See from the sparks of their own minds commence
And spread far round the glow of pure intelligence.

Thrice happy they, the few, that o'er the throng
Of names that perish, wing their glorious flight,
Explore the avenues of deathless song,
And live for ever in resplendent light,
Mocking decay, and envious time's despight.
The many 'mid the flood of ages fail,
Borne down for ever in oblivion's night:
But these above the tide in ether sail,
And nations yet unborn shall bid their triumph hail.

Mount, my adventurous descant!  tho' thy strain
Rise not to join the harpings of the Lyre
Sacred alone to that immortal train,
The unapproached Lords of song, that fire
The souls of all that listen to their quire&mdash;
Yet fearless mount!  for from a noble theme
Thy numbers flow:  and safely may aspire
To win from just and loyal hearts esteem,
And truth and virtuous love some faults may well redeem.

And THOU, UNNAMED!  and ever so to be
Unless my song achieve its lofty aim,
Safe in thy shade my true devotion see:
No strain of mine of doubtful note shall shame
The sanction of thy tutelary name.
Clear from the perils of my flight peruse
Unseen my course:  but should the breath of fame
Play sweetly with the hymnings of my muse
What dearer name than thine for honour can I chuse?

What smile, approving, in my heart can raise
A purer glow of joy than flows from thine?
What voice like thine will sweetly sound in praise,
Should that dear meed of happy song be mine?
Nor thou my homage, offer'd thus, decline;
Since thy own feelings animate my strain:
To splendid crimes due guerdon I assign;
As thou, I view false Glory with disdain;
Nor shall ambition's praise my honest numbers stain.

Thou art not one that mocks the studious oil
Burnt o'er the labours of the wakeful night;
Thy soul despises not the Poet's toil
That imps his wing for honourable flight:
Not in the bowers of bacchanal delight,
Not in the myrtle shades of amorous joy
Thou leavest him pausing:  but to realms of light
Up-pointing, bidst him spurn each idle toy,
And but on noblest themes man's noblest powers employ.

Then from the tissue of my lay receive
These portions, while the shuttle swiftly flies
The latest margin of my web to weave;
And let thy voice my labours authorise:
So the wrought characters before thine eyes
Shall call back Justice, whose revolting wing
Leaves man forlorn, turn'd upward to the skies;
And, as the varied threads of song I fling,
Faith, Honour, thine own Truth, beneath my hand shall spring.
