O!  for his Heaven descended fire,
Who sung Achilles' rage in strains divine;
Or his who bade Rome's godlike sire,
For ever live in his immortal line.
Then Keppel in my lays sublime,
Thy name should long survive th' unmeasur'd reign of time.

Chief of the Nine, celestial Muse!
Whom oft with ardent vows I late implor'd;
Thy genial influence to diffuse
Thro' all my frame; if e'er thou did'st afford
Thy list'ning ear to my request,
If e'er thy magic power my raptur'd soul possest.

While now a far sublimer theme,
Than all that erst invok'd thy sacred aid,
Calls loud for thy transporting flame,
Come sweetest virgin from th' embow'ring glade;
Thy lov'd retreat, and gently o'er
My soul, a double portion of thy spirit pour.

Be mine the high-resounding lyre,
Thy Flaccus swept and join'd his Heaven-taught lays;
My nobler subject shall inspire
A loftier strain of widely echoing praise.
As his Augustus yields to mine,
So my diviner fire shall glow thro' ev'ry line.

There are, who only great appear
When fickle Fortune sheds her favouring ray;
Be mine to bid the world revere,
A hero rais'd above her changeful sway;
Whose fame to blast, whose worth to hide,
In vain the clouds and storms by Envy rais'd, or Pride.

Against his life th' infernal band,
Athirst for guiltless blood their rage unite;
Dauntless and firm behold him stand,
His manly countenance serenely bright;
With smiles which innocence supplies,
And all his placid soul forth beaming in his eyes.

In vain with lies th' assassin strove
To wrest the laurel from thine honour'd brows;
All his detested efforts prove,
How much to thee a grateful people owes;
And each vile art to blast thy fame,
Serves only to reflect new lustre on thy name.

So when Hyperion's fiery steeds,
Up Heaven's steep hill begin their ardent way;
Awhile some envious cloud succeeds,
But soon retires before his noon-tide ray;
And all at once divinely bright,
He bursts in glory forth, and charms th' admiring sight.

Not the recording page that boasts
Of Goree's walls, or Belleisle's rocky shore;
Or points to Cuba's dang'rous coasts,
And counts exulting thy long glories o'er,
So fair thy merits could disclose,
So high thy triumphs raise o'er thine and Virtue's foes.

Nor silent be the trump of Fame,
For those whose firm souls dar'd in needful hour
To vindicate an injur'd name,
Or those who scorn'd the giant arm of pow'r;
And greatly with united voice,
Proclaim'd the hero's praise, and swell'd a nation's joys.

O Keppel!  let thy faithful breast
Glow with new ardours for Britannia's weal;
Still be thine active mind possest
Of gen'rous aims, her inward wounds to heal;
And from each foreign stroke to save,
Her thund'ring navies lead triumphant thro' the wave.

And see even now th' insulting foe
Calls for thine arm to check his tow'ring pride;
Britannia's genius bids thee go,
His best lov'd son full oft in danger tried,
Go and assert thy country's cause,
May Heav'n thy virtues bless, and Britons shout applause.
