Ye Chiefs renown'd of that high honour'd Train
Which sav'd, in times of tempest and dismay,
Our shatter'd Bark from found'ring on the Main,
Will ye now cast yourselves and it away?

Steady thro' storms ye steer'd, and firmly sought,
By Freedom's foes when vig'rously assail'd;
And must we lose that safety, dearly bought,
Through your own weakness, where their force hath fail'd?

Now Victory holds forth her laurel-wreath
And bids you twine it with your civic bough,
And can ye infamously crouch beneath
The little Tyrants, ye might sink so low?

Fame's trumpet loud your patriot-acts proclaims,
And Jove himself regardeth you with love;
And can ye then give up fair, deathless, names
On Earth, and endless happiness above?

For what? &mdash; for nothing; rightly understood,
Virtue alone substantial bliss bestows,
From Vice as soon proceedeth real good,
As Wisdom's light from dark-eyed Folly flows.

Thron'd in our grateful hearts, secure ye reign,
So thron'd, despise Court-favour's tott'ring seat,
Their promises, as late their threats, disdain,
Yourselves alone can make you truly great.

With power lure they?  Who would wish to live
The slave of Kings, to be of slaves a King?
Or blushing Honours do they boast to give?
None flourish fair which from dishonour spring.

Can the faint glimm'ring of superfluous gold
With Virtue's adamantine radiance vie?
Or shall immortal Amaranths be sold
For Weeds, which wither ev'n before we die?

Can the gilt Equipage's gay parade,
Rich Plate's bright polish, or the nectar'd Board,
Joys, like the conscious thought that ye have made
A people happy!  to your souls afford?

Can pillar'd Structures, proudly swelling Domes,
In gloomy state, that violate the Air,
Vie with unnumber'd comfortable Homes,
Whose Beds ye soften, and whose Hearths ye chear?

Can fading Tints, or mimic Marble please
Like Life, by you, with Freedom's blessing crown'd?
Can Music charm you like the voice of praise,
When your bless'd heart-strings vibrate to the sound?

These, the Delight of elevated minds,
But spring on Earth, to ripen in the Sky,
While Fortune's blossoms, when Fate's nipping winds
Touch their frail texture, sicken, fade and die!

On the pale lip when hangs the quiv'ring breath,
Availeth Adulation's Siren-sound?
When swims the viewless, closing Eye, in death,
What boots the gorgeous Pomp display'd around?

Can Places, Pensions, Titles &mdash; all the Smiles
Of "brief Authority" Man's fears controul?
No.  'Tis the Smile of Conscience that beguiles
Nature's last pangs, and sooths the parting Soul.

What tho' no stately sable-plumed Horse,
Life's last act o'er, slow drag the pond'rous Bier?
What tho' no flaunting 'scutcheons mock the corse,
If it be follow'd by the gen'ral tear?

Let Sculpture, and the Poet's venal hand,
With marbled Praise, insult th' unworthy Dead;
But near my lowly Urn may Virtue stand
Weeping, and Liberty recline the head!

And late, O!  late!  may Athens, tho' secure,
Thro' you, from Ruin, tremble o'er your graves!
O!  may her Freedom, with your Fame endure
Whilst Ocean old her shores indented laves.
