Oh!  I have seen the crested plumes wave high,
Have seen the haughty banner lift its head;
And I have watch'd the glance from Beauty's eye,
That round the warrior's brow a glory shed,&mdash;
Beam'd for an instant, and then vanished,
Like a bright flash of lightning from the sky,
That o'er the darksome plain a radiance spread,
And gilds th' expanse of Heav'n's blue canopy,
My path was once as bright, but happiness has fled.

And I have heard the peeling organ swell
Its choral anthem through the fretted aisle;
Have heard the distant sound of convent bell
Chime its last vesper through the lengthen'd pile,
And my young heart has throbb'd with joy the while.
And I have watch'd the moon-beam's latest ray,
That decks the valleys with a parting smile,
Then darts a lustre ere she fades away,
To light the traveller's path along the deep defile.

And I have heard the tempest whistling round
The ivied ruins of some ancient tower,
Whose crumbling walls, now bending to the ground,
Have shelter'd Innocence in ruthless hour,
When the soft brow of Friendship 'gan to lour.
And I have heard the foaming billows roar,
And their rude waves have visited my bower,
As though they sought to kiss the verdant shore
Before the storm should burst with unrelenting power.

And I have seen the death-bed of the brave,
And heard the hero breathe his latest sigh;
Have seen fair Beauty bending o'er the grave,
Telling her sorrows to each passer-by:
And I have mark'd her softly beaming eye,
Whose sadness spoke no language of despair,
Turn'd with exulting hope toward the sky,
As though they saw her bleeding lover there,
Crown'd with a laurel wreath whose verdure cannot die.

Yes &mdash; scenes like these my youthful heart has known,
When life was new, and Hope's fair star was bright;
But gaiety's light wing has never flown
Since lov'd Olivia vanish'd from my sight,
And left me buried in the shades of night.
No syren voice now greets my list'ning ear&mdash;
No gentle hand supports my languid frame&mdash;
No angel sweetness calms my madness here:
The world to me is nought &mdash; alike its praise or blame.

Sorrow has spread her sable pall for me,
And Death has pierc'd me with his 'vengeful dart;
But I would hail the stroke that sets me free,
And gives Olivia back my wounded heart,
And bids us meet, aye, never more to part.
But thoughts like these, for me, are idle dreams;
Yet welcome sleep, that gives my spirit peace,
And sheds athwart my soul Hope's radiant beams,
That for an instant shine, to bid my sorrows cease!
