How frail is man!  of those we knew of yore,
Our morning friends, how many are no more!
And those who now survive, ah!  soon must fall;
Nought is immortal on this earthly ball:
Does not the moon, its chaste attendant bright,
Wane or increase with each revolving night?
Day follows night, and night succeeds to day;
The rolling seasons each to each gives way.

Thus change seems needful, Nature to sustain;
Then why should mortal man of change complain,
In whom this law of nature is display'd?
For by mutations human life is sway'd;
Childhood, then youth, prime manhood, last old age,
And death expels the driveller from life's stage.
These grave conceits have pass'd my mind of late;
Whence they arise the sequent numbers state.

Lately in town, it was my chance to meet
An old acquaintance in the public street;
Each other from our youth we had not seen,
Since when we sported on the village-green
Associates we in learning and in play,
Oft hand-in-hand to school we took our way;
Or on half-holidays we roam'd in quest
Of meadow-flow'rs, or sought the secret nut.

The stripling school-boy, with his rosy face,
Had fully ripen'd into manhood's grace;
Yet on that brow, once polish'd and serene,
Furrows of thought or carping care were seen:
Business alone had drawn him from his home;
Settled for life, no wish had he to roam.
I too was alter'd much; he hinted so,&mdash;
I took the hint, tho' age with self comes slow.
After inquiries of each other's weal
Since last we met, I begg'd him to reveal
The village news.  Of all whom erst I knew,
There but remain'd alive a scanty few,
And these were chang'd; some had grown rich, once poor;
Others, once rich, crav'd alms from door to door,
Or in the workhouse eat the parish bread,
Doled out by those their former bounty fed.
Says he, "the Rector, whom you lash'd in rhyme,
Has yielded to the power of wealth, or time;
He seldom preaches on the sabbath-day,
Another curate starves upon his pay,
A meagre man, tho' learned and discreet;
Poor elf I fear he hardly makes ends meet:
Five half-starv'd children and a sickly wife
Fill up to him the bitter cup of life;
The Rector-drone enjoys the honied meed
Of others' toils; they starve, that he may feed.
Ned Sly, th' informer, grandson to old Nick,
Has fled the country for some knavish trick.
Old Justice Bully, who with thund'ring tongue
So loud proclaim'd the offender's shame and wrong,
The paupers' dread, and maids that slipp'd aside
With naughty men, fell ill last week and died.
The Bouncer family, too, (for Heav'n is just)
Who soar'd so high, are humbled to the dust.
One piece of news remains for you to hear,
Which well demands the tribute of a tear."
Falt'ring he spoke, his bosom heav'd a sigh:
"Poor Friz is dead, &mdash; we all are born to die."

I recollect full well his coming down,
A flutt'ring coxcomb then, from London town;
The girls admir'd him, and our swains with pain
Saw smiles for him, whilst they met cold disdain:
The empty fop will often win the fair
From rugged worth, and mock at his despair.
Peach-bloom his coat, his hat with triple cocks,
A tap'ring queue, and crisp'd and powder'd locks;
Blue mottled hose with large white silken clocks,
Smart channel-pumps, and silver buckles broad
Adorn'd his feet &mdash; in town he wore a sword;
His clouded cane he dangled with an air&mdash;
The squire in dress with him might not compare.
Such was his garb some forty years ago;
But now, alas!  grim Death has laid him low.

Oft have I linger'd, in my boyish days,
Upon the windows of poor Friz to gaze:
One was devoted solely to his trade,
Wares of all kinds the other bow display'd;
Here gaudy prints were rang'd to make a show,
And penny hist'ries marshall'd in a row;
Soap, candles, sugar, tea, tobacco, snuff;
There wigs, perfumes, his razors, strop and puff.
A gen'ral chapman, provident was Friz,
If he could live, he heeded not a quiz.
Teeth he extracted almost without pain,&mdash;
I've heard it whisper'd he could breathe a vein;
This was "au secret;" doctors hate encroachers
Call'd quacks, as much as gamekeepers hate poachers.
Of Saturday, to Friz in all the week
The most important day, the Muse must speak:
What numbers throng'd his shop, without, within,
Each anxious to present his unreap'd chin
(A weekly crop) to his bright razor keen,
Whose magic touch could make the foulest clean.
Beards of all hues, black, grizzled, tawny, gray,
Downy and red, were smoothly shav'd away.

Light was his hand; an adept in his art,
He ne'er drew blood, or caused the slightest smart
Or awkward feel in that most ticklish part.
The village gossip circles briskly round;
Some sage old prosing swain, with looks profound,
Now opens out his budget, choice and rare,
Of wond'rous tales, and to their truth will swear.
Another, anxious not to be surpast,
Details more lying wonders than the last.
Friz in his turn his quota would supply,
His jokes were ever ready cut and dry.
Arch was his look, significant his leer,
Civil to all, his constant phrase "my dear;"
To men and women he applied the same,
That gentle salutation who could blame?
A would-be wit, his store of news supplies,
Geography and hist'ry he belies;
War, scandal, politics, the church and state,
Are each in turn the subject of debate.
Noise here supplied the place of common-sense,
Who roar'd the loudest had most eloquence.

Upon a time a call to Friz was given,
A heavenly call, he thought it came from heav'n;
And with that call was sent the gift of pray'r,
A flow of words, and tropes and figures rare.
What fluent nonsense trickled from his tongue!
How deep he grunted, and how loud he sung!
If in his shop some wicked wag should broach
A funny tale, tho' it were foul reproach
To seem to listen, yet you might espy
A merry twinkling agitate his eye;
Instant it past, a groan, a queer grimace
And prim, resum'd its empire o'er his face.
Old things were chang'd, and all things were made new,
Resolv'd no more his calling to pursue
On Sabbath morns, and woe betide the wight
Who came too late on Saturday at night.
Shav'd or unshav'd, imperative his law
As Medes' and Persians', he must thence withdraw
Soon as the clock the hour of twelve had toll'd.
'Tis said his zeal defied the power of gold!
For once, while musing in his shop alone,
Midnight was past, his customers just gone,
Each bolt and bar and lock he'd made secure,
Behold One enter'd by the outer door;
Dark was his look, and sable his attire,
His lurid eyes gleam'd with unearthly fire;
And he requested to be shav'd and drest.
Friz negativ'd politely this request;
Told him he ne'er profan'd the sabbath-morn.
At this the sable stranger laugh'd in scorn;
He proffer'd gold; but Friz declin'd the bait,
Bade him depart; but still the man would wait.
Friz trembled now; for, looking down, he spied
A cloven foot th' intruder sought to hide.
"Resist the devil and he'll flee from you,"
The Scripture saith:  he pray'd, the tempter flew,
But left behind ('tis passing strange to tell,
And to believe) a vile sulphureous smell.
Just then a dog gave nine deep hideous howls;
He knew this was the enemy of souls,
Employed to tempt and prove his faith this night;
But prayer and faith put the foul fiend to flight.

There liv'd an ancient shaver o'er the way,
Who scrupled not to break the sabbath-day;
Yet 'twas a desperate case in those that gave
Their chins to him, to mangle, not to shave.
Palsied his hand, his razors dull to boot,
Beards were not shav'd, but pluck'd up by the root.
And here those customers whom Friz dismiss'd,
Were doom'd to wince beneath his horny list,
Their chins he seam'd with many a ghastly scar.&mdash;
Betwixt them rag'd a never ceasing war;
Oft they sprung up in furious mood and swore,
Their lather'd chins meanwhile distilling gore,
To stretch the bungler on his own shop-floor.
Hence have I seen them sullenly retreat,
Mutt'ring low curses as they walk'd the street,
(Patch'd was each face with cobweb or with flue,
To check the starting blood from oozing through)
Sternly resolv'd with Friz next week t' ensure
An early turn, by what they now endure.
Thus was his worth confess'd by friend and foe;
But now, alas!  grim Death has laid him low.

Friz, in his merry mood, would quaintly tell
A strange adventure which to him befell,
And thus it was: &mdash; Just in the market-place
Liv'd David Rick, a rosy Boniface;
He sold good ale, and wine and spirits too;
"I knew him well, and all the village knew."
Upon a strange expedient he hit,
Which shew'd at once his oddness and his wit.
His sign was like the "Party Shield" of yore,
Each staring side a different emblem bore;
Here St. George battled with the dragon fierce;
A jolly sailor stood on the reverse,
Who, with a beck'ning hand and foaming pot,
Invited to the house each passing sot.
What tho' no knights in fierce encounter met
Like those of old, yet many an eager bet
This sign gave rise to, and he did not fail
To reap the profit, &mdash; for it sold his ale.

In scenes like these the days of David fled,
Till Atropos cut short his vital thread.
Friz was call'd in upon that mournful night
To pay his neighbour the last needful rite:
'Twere odious sure to send him to the grave
With beard so long, &mdash; so he the corpse must shave.
A host of vulgar terrors fill'd his head
At this request, and shook his soul with dread.
A wag beheld his fears, and humbly crav'd
To hold the candle whilst the dead he shav'd.
Together they proceeded up the stairs
Where David slept, devoid of earthly cares;
One sickly taper lighted up the room,
Which but increased the melancholy gloom.
Friz now approach'd the corse with stealthy pace,
Napkin'd the chin, and lather'd the cold face;
High was the couch, and vainly he essay'd
To shave the dead, who in the midst was laid.
Emboldened by his mate, his fears subside,
Light he sprung up, and fairly got astride
Of the defunct, defying sprite or ghost;
But ah!  he reckon'd here without his host.
Just at that juncture, lo!  the waggish wight,
On mischief bent, popp'd out the winking light,
Slamm'd too the door, and quickly took to flight.
Friz sought with haste to make a good retreat
He gave a spring; &mdash; was it the winding sheet?
Or, as he thought, the dead man held him fast,
And on the floor the affrighted barber cast!
He kick'd and struggled, plung'd and roar'd amain,
Its iron grasp the corpse would firm maintain.
"Even in our ashes live their wonted fires:"
So sings sweet Gray, whom every Muse inspires.

David in life was call'd a man of game,
And now in death appeared to be the same.
He, as indignant, from that bed's vast height
Roll'd on the prostrate foe his deadly weight;
Struggling awhile the groaning tonsor lay,
Press'd by this load of "monumental clay."
Murder!  he shouts with hoarse-resounding breath
With murder rings the awful room of death.
Rous'd by those thundering sounds and shrieks of woe
A motley group assembled from below
To learn the cause, the mystery to unfold,
And dreadful is the scene which they behold:
There lay the dead man, mix'd in mortal strife
With him who hardly now could boast of life:
In evil plight, Friz one nice sense annoy'd;
But here the blushing Muse demands a void....

From his flush'd nose the blood ran trickling down,
And many a bump was on his batter'd crown;
Spurzheim and Gall had been sore pos'd indeed
By his knobb'd cranium his forte to read.
When by assistance he his feet regain'd,
The puzzling conflict was at once explain'd;
His buckle-tongue, with firm tenacious clasp,
Still held the winding-sheet with giant grasp!
Next morn this feat was bruited far and near;
Friz join'd the laugh and brav'd the public jeer;
How slight the cause whence all his terrors sprung,
Simply the loosening of his buckle's tongue!
He liv'd to see the buckle in disgrace,
And the soft silken shoe-string take its place.

Peace to his manes, &mdash; he has pass'd the bourne
Whence mortal traveller can ne'er return;
What tho' unknown o heraldry and fame,
His life was useful and devoid of blame:
Another link of the fast less'ning chain
Of those I knew his death has snapt in twain;
His quips, and pranks, and oddities are o'er,
He never will amuse me with them more;
Like a parch'd stream whose waters cease to flow,
His spring of mirth is dry &mdash; grim Death has laid him low.&mdash;
