&mdash; A blushing maid;
Certes of earthly mould, yet, the pure throng
Celestial never lovelier displayed
A paynim tiara her head array'd,
Whence, o'er her graceful shoulders clustering flow
Her ebon tresses, that for ever play'd
As fitful breath of sportive breezes blow,
Chequering, with soften'd shade, her bosom's spotless snow.

A loosely flowing robe of purest white
Her native loveliness but half conceal'd,
And to her feet fell down in drapery light,
Which all her form so modestly reveal'd,
That, though it to the gazer's eye appeal'd
And adoration claimed, yet, never thought
Profane to lawless mind could pleasure yield;
So lovely pure she seemed, like angel, brought
Newly from Heaven's gate, who kindred spirit sought.

Her full dark eyes, beaming with holy zeal,
Were upward rais'd; and on her bosom press'd
Her clasped hands; while from its source did steal
A crystal drop, that glistening express'd
The pure devotion swelling in her breast:
For, to her mind, the splendid orb of day,
Now proudly wheeling from his watery rest,
Seem'd the Almighty one, whose boundless sway,
Ere time was born began, and never shall decay.

Then, as with form inclin'd, and bended knee,
On a rude stone which Nature's fostering hand
With mossy cushion graced, of ecstasy
And holy rapture she appear'd to stand
The sculptured emblem:  while, with accents bland,
Her parting lips, right fitly formed to join
In sacred praises, and themselves command
Devotion, e'en where purest spirits shine,
Breathed forth these hallow'd thoughts in utterance divine.

"Parent sublime!  Fountain of life and light!
To thee I bow the head and bend the knee,
Whether thou shinest but the emblem bright
Of more omnipotent Divinity;
Or art thyself, from deep eternity,
The uncreated, all-creative Power!
Lo!  Nature, hymning, lifts her voice to thee
In grateful homage, at this dewy hour,
Leading the infant day, forth from her rosed bower.

"As from a misty ocean, all display'd
Like fresh creation, opens fair the vale;
Sparkles with wat'ry pearl each springing blade;
While every shrub and flower, on the gale,
Collecting fragrance, all their sweets exhale
In tributary incense mounting high:
And, white with blossom, every leafy shade,
Teeming with promise of futurity,
Salutes thy rising beam and march along the sky.

"All animated beings lift to thee
The eye of gratitude and tongue of praise!
Whether in hum of insect; or, from tree
And shady copse, the feather'd songsters raise
Sweet warbled concert; or, with upward gaze,
Soft low the kine; or, bleat the gentle sheep;
Or, with subdued glare, the savage race
Mutter faints growls; or, from the rocky steep
The eagle screams, or osprey o'er the deep:

"All join, accordant, in the sacred strain,
From where thou risest out the emerald sea
In the far orient, to the western main,
Lauding thine influence as Divinity!
Man only speaks with dark uncertainty;
Child of conjecture!  lost in wandering,
And tangled in unravell'd mystery:
Yet, sees 'tis thee who wakes the smiling Spring
And Summer crowns with flowers, and Autumn's treasures bring.

"God of my sires!  it is enough for me
To feel thy spirit stirring in this breast,
Whether, or emblem thou, or Deity!
Still will I kneel adoring thee, the best,
If not sole God, that, to my eye confest,
Watches the world that rolls beneath thy beam
Eternal, until it shall cease to rest
On its foundations; and, all fractur'd, seem
As it had never been, the fabric of a dream!"

She ceas'd to speak, yet, in the attitude
For adoration meet and holy prayer,
A while she kneeling bent; then, rising, stood,
Eyeing the radiant orb, with bosom bare,
All heaving, to receive his warm beam there,
A virgin priestess of the solar fane.
Ah!  who such pure devotion will declare
A sacred mockery, an impious strain?
What conscience feels as truth, dare man pronounce it vain?
