Methought that in a Burial-ground
One still, sad vernal day,
Upon a little daisied mound
I in a slumber lay;
While faintly through my dream I heard
The hymning of that holy Bird,
Who with more gushing sweetness sings
The higher up in Heaven float his unwearied wings!

In that my mournful reverie,
Such song of heavenly birth
The voice seemed of a Soul set free
From this imprisoning Earth;
Higher and higher still it soared,
A thrilling rapture that adored,
Till vanished song and singer blest
In the blue depths of everlasting rest.

Just then, a Child, in sportive glee,
Came gliding o'er the graves,
Like a lone bird that on the sea
Floats dallying with the waves;
Upon the lovely flowers awhile
She poured the beauty of her smile,
Then laid her bright cheek on the sod,
And, overpowered with joy, slept in the eye of God.

The flowers that shine all round her head
May well be breathing sweet,
For flowers are they that Spring hath shed
To deck her winding-sheet;
And well the tenderest gleams may fail
Of sunshine on that hillock small
On which she sleeps, for they have smiled
O'er the predestined grave of that unconscious Child.

In bridal garments, white as snow,
A solitary Maid
Doth meekly bring a sunny glow
Into that solemn shade.
A Church-yard seems a joyful place
In the visit of so sweet a face,&mdash;
A soul is in that deep blue eye
Too good to live on earth &mdash; too beautiful to die.

But Death behind a marble Tomb
Looks out upon his prey,
And smiles to know that heavenly bloom
Is yet of earthly clay,
Far off I hear a wailing wide,
And, while I gaze upon that Bride,
A silent Wraith before me stands,
And points unto a grave with cold, pale, clasped hands.

A Matron beautiful and bright,
As is the silver Moon,
Whose lustre tames the sparkling light
Of the starry eyes of June,
Is shining o'er the Church-yard lone,
While circling her as in a zone,
Delighted dance five Cherubs fair,
And round their native urn shake wide their golden hair.

O Children they are holy things,
In sight of Earth and Heaven!
An Angel shields with guardian wings,
The home where they are given.
Strong power there is in children's tears,
And stronger in their lisped prayers&mdash;
But the vulture stoops down from above,
And, mid her orphan brood, bears off the Parent Dove.

The young &mdash; the youthful &mdash; the mature,
Have smiled and all past by,
As if nought lovely could endure
Beneath the envious sky;
While bowed with age and age's woes,
Still near &mdash; yet still far off the close
Of weary life, yon aged Crone
Can scarce with blind eyes find her Husband's funeral stone.

All dead the joyous, bright, and free,
To whom this life was dear!&mdash;
The green leaves shivered from the tree
And dangling left the sere!
O dim wild world! &mdash; but from the sky
Down came the glad Lark waveringly,
And, startled by his liquid mirth,
I rose to walk in Faith the darkling paths of Earth.
