Sweet Village!  on thy pastoral hill
Arrayed in sunlight sad and still,
As if beneath the harvest moon
Thy noiseless homes were sleeping
It is the merry month of June,
And creatures all of air and earth
Should now their holiday of mirth
With dance and song be keeping.
But loveliest Village!  silent Thou,
As cloud wreathed o'er the Morning's brow,
When light is faintly breaking,
And Midnight's voice afar is lost,
Like the wailing of a wearied ghost,
The shades of earth forsaking.

'Tis not the Day to Scotia dear,
A summer Sabbath mild and dear
Yet from her solemn burial-ground,
The small Kirk-Steeple looks around,
Enshrouded in a calm
Profound as fills the house of prayer,
Ere from the band of virgins fair
Is breathed the choral psalm.
A sight so steeped in perfect rest
Is slumbering not on nature's breast
In the smiles of earthly day!
'Tis a picture floating down the sky,
By fancy framed in years gone by,
And mellowing in decay!
That thought is gone! &mdash; the Village still
With deepening quiet crowns the hill,
Its low green roofs are there!
In soft material beauty beaming,
As in the silent hour of dreaming
They hung embowered in air!

Is this the Day when to the mountains
The happy shepherds go,
And bathe in sparkling pools and fountains
Their flocks made white as snow?
Hath gentle girl and gamesome boy,
With meek-eyed mirth or shouting joy,
Gone tripping up the brae?
Till far behind their town doth stand,
Like an image in sweet Faery Land
When the Elves have flown away!&mdash;
&mdash;O sure if aught of human breath
Within these walls remain,
Thus deepening in the hush of death,
'Tis but some melancholy crone,
Who sits with solemn eyes
Beside the cradle all alone,
And lulls the infant with a strain
Of Scotia's ancient melodies.

What if these homes be filled with life?
'Tis the sultry month of June,
And when the cloudless sun rides high
Above the glittering air of noon,
All nature sinks opprest,&mdash;
And labour shuts his weary eye
In the mid-day hour of rest.
Yet let the soul think what it will,
Most dirgelike mourns that moorland rill!
How different once its flow!
When with a dreamy motion gliding
Mid its green fields in love abiding,
Or leaping o'er the mossy linn,
And sporting with its own wild din,
Seemed water changed to snow.
Beauty lies spread before my sight,
But grief-like shadows dim its light,
And all the scene appears
Like a church-yard when a friend is dying,
In more than earthly stillness lying,
And glimmering through our tears!

Sweet Woodburn!  like a cloud that name
Comes floating o'er my soul!
Although thy beauty still survive,
One look hath changed the whole.
The gayest village of the gay
Beside thy own sweet river,
Wert Thou on Week or Sabbath day!
So bathed in the blue light of joy,
As if no trouble could destroy
Peace doomed to last for ever.
Now in the shadow of thy trees,
On a green plat, sacred to thy breeze,
The fell Plague-Spirit grimly lies
And broods, as in despite
Of uncomplaining lifelessness,
On the troops of silent shades that press
Into the church-yard's cold recess,
From that region of delight.

Last summer, from the school-house door,
When the glad play-bell was ringing,
What shoals of bright-haired elves would pour,
Like small waves racing on the shore.
In dance of rapture singing!
Oft by yon little silver well,
Now sleeping in neglected cell,
The village maid would stand,
While resting on the mossy bank,
With freshened soul the traveller drank
The cold cup from her hand;
Haply some soldier from the war,
Who would remember long and far
That Lily of the Land.
And still the green is bright with flowers,
And dancing through the sunny hours
Like blossoms from enchanted bowers
On a sudden wafted by,
Obedient to the changeful air
And proudly feeling they are fair
Glide bird and butterfly.
But where is the tiny hunter-rout
That revelled on with dance and shout
Against their airy prey?
Alas!  the fearless linnet sings,
And the bright insect folds its wings
Upon the dewy flower that springs
Above these children's day.
And if to yon deserted well
Some solitary maid,
As she was wont at eve, should go&mdash;
There silent as her shade
She stands awhile &mdash; then sad and slow
Walks home, afraid to think
Of many a loudly-laughing ring
That dipped their pitchers in that spring,
And lingered round its brink.

On &mdash; on &mdash; through woful images
My spirit holds her way!
Death in each drooping flower she sees;
And oft the momentary breeze
Is singing of decay.
&mdash;So high upon the slender bough
Why hangs the crow her nest?
All undisturbed her young have lain
This spring-time in their nest,
Nor as they flew on tender wing
E'er feared the cross-bow or the sling.
Tame as the purpling turtle-dove,
That walks serene in human love,
The magpie hops from door to door;
And the hare, nor fearing to be seen,
Doth gambol on the village green
As on the lonely moor.
The few sheep wandering by the brook
Have all a dim neglected look,
Oft bleating in their dumb distress
On her their sweet dead shepherdess.
The horses pasturing through the range
Of gateless fields, all common now,
Free from the yoke enjoy the change,
To them a long long Sabbath-sleep!
Then gathering in one thunderous band,
Across the wild they sweep,
Tossing the long hair from their eyes&mdash;
Till far the living whirlwind flies
As o'er the desert sand.
From human let their course is free&mdash;
No lonely angler down the lea
Invites the zephyr's breath&mdash;
And the beggar far away doth roam,
Preferring in his hovel-home
His penury to death.
On that green hedge a scattered row
Now weather-stained &mdash; once white as snow&mdash;
Of garments that have long been spread,
And now belong unto the dead,
Shroud-like proclaim to every eye,
"This is no place for Charity!"

O blest are ye!  unthinking creatures!
Rejoicing in your lowly natures
Ye dance round human tombs;
Where gladlier sings the mounting lark
Than o'er the churchyard dim and dark!
Or where, than on the churchyard wall,
From the wild rose-tree brighter fall
Her transitory blooms!
What is it to that lovely sky
If all her worshippers should die!
As happily her splendours play
On the grave where human forms decay,
As o'er the dewy turf of Morn,
Where the virgin, like a woodland Fay
On wings of joy was borne.
&mdash;Even now a soft and silvery haze
Hill &mdash; Village &mdash; Tree &mdash; is steeping
In the loveliness of happier days,
Ere rose the voice of weeping!
When incense-fires from every hearth,
To heaven stole beautiful from earth.

Sweet spire!  that crown'st the house of God!
To thee my spirit turns,
While through a cloud the softened light
On thy yellow dial burns.
Ah, me!  my bosom inly bleeds
To see the deep-worn path that leads
Unto that open gate
In silent blackness it doth tell
How oft thy little sullen bell
Hath o'er the village tolled its knell,
In beauty desolate.
Oft, wandering by myself at night,
Such spire hath risen in softened light
Before my gladdened eyes,&mdash;
And as I looked around to see
The village sleeping quietly
Beneath the quiet skies,&mdash;
Methought that mid her stars so bright,
The moon in placid mirth,
Was not in heaven a holier sight&mdash;
Than God's house on the earth.
Sweet image!  transient in my soul!
That very bell hath ceased to toll
When the grave receives its dead&mdash;
And the last time it slowly swung
'Twas by a dying stripling rung
O'er the sexton's hoary head!
All silent now from cot or hall
Comes forth the sable funeral!
The Pastor is not there!
For yon sweet Manse now empty stands,
Nor in its walls will holier hands
Be e'er held up in prayer.
&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;
