O Liberty, to Britain's favour'd Land
Far dearer than the Muses fabled Throng,
Propitious guide me with thy friendly Hand,
And while I sing thy Praises, aid my Song!
So shall I soar above this earthly Sphere,
And so shall all thy Sons with due Attention hear.

Bear me, O bear me, to each Plain and Flood
Renown'd for Triumphs in thy sacred Cause,
Where in firm Ranks our warlike Barons stood,
Th' Avengers of thy violated Laws;
But chief on Thames' fam'd Borders let me stray,
Then waft me to the Boyne, and last to Northern Spey!

O point the Spot, where, in th' embattled Field,
Ere Slaughter swell'd the Boyne's impetuous Tide,
Thy guardian Arm, with providential Shield,
Turn'd, unobserv'd, the guiltless Ball aside:
'Twas thou, blest Nymph, that from th' impending Blow
In that important Hour preserv'd thy Champion's Brow.

Swift ran the Rumour through th' Hibernian Host
That William, dreaded William, was no more;
Thence to the Capital and farthest Coast
It flew, and ev'n to Gallia's distant Shore;
Each Slave, each Priest, unseemly Joy betray'd,
And Rome's triumphant Cross once more in Thought survey'd.

When Britain, in luxurious Charles's Reign,
In fatal Union join'd with faithless Gaul,
The States of harrass'd Belgia to enchain,
Resolv'd to perish, or avert her Fall,
The Patriot-Hero, in his youthful Years,
To Conquest led by thee, dispell'd his Country's Fears.

Again, when Tyranny, worst Fiend of Rome,
In this despairing Isle terrific rose,
Soon he dispers'd that more than Stygian Gloom,
And soon the Monster sunk beneath his Blows:
To Him, to Thee, we owe that Royal Race
Who now with gentle Sway Britannia's Sceptre grace.

What though the Bourbon Chiefs, inur'd to Arms,
O'er ravag'd Flandria, like a Torrent, spread,
Friend to thy Rights, and Votary to thy Charms,
Through Glory's Paths thy Hosts the Warrior led;
Witness thy Plains, O Steenkirk, stain'd with Blood,
Witness dread Landen's Field, and Sambre's wondering Flood.

From martial Toils, in Windsor's Shades, retir'd,
Our last Deliverer, of the Brunswick Race,
Our second William, with thy Love inspir'd,
Delights, fair Liberty, thy Deeds to trace;
Display'd in History's recording Page,
The Triumphs of thy Sons his peaceful Thoughts engage.

And well we know by whom the Highland Bands
Back to their Friths and native Rocks were driven;
Vain their Attempts to seize our cultur'd Lands,
By France and Rome commission'd, not by Heaven;
Th' almighty Sire, whom Earth and Heaven obey,
Confirms a Brunswick's Right, approves a Brunswick's Sway.

Though swift thy flew o'er half th' unguarded Realm,
And Terror in each loyal Face appear'd,
Tho' all, but George, were daunted at the Helm,
When Charles on Derby's Plains his Standard rear'd;
Yet what avail'd this fugitive Success?
What Perth's distinguish'd Zeal, or Lovat's sage Address?

What fierce Balmerino's undaunted Air,
Who with stern Smiles the Field of Death survey'd;
What wise Pitsligo's Skill, or Elcho's Care,
Or what ev'n Manchester's disloyal Aid?
When Crawford, wafted from the Belgian Shore,
Unsheath'd his dreaded Blade, distain'd with Turkish Gore;

When Guest and Blakeney, in Britannia's Cause
Firm and unshaken, check'd their rapid Course;
And last, to rescue our endanger'd Laws,
When youthful William, with resistless Force,
Eager pursued them o'er the Tweed and Spey,
And dash'd Rebellion's Hopes on fam'd Culloden's Day.

So perish all whom Rome's ensnaring Arts,
And Gallia's flattering Promises, excite
To rob our Sovereign of his Subjects Hearts,
And quench our pure Religion's Gospel-Light!
So all have perish'd, who, beguil'd by Pride,
Have sigh'd for Slavery's Yoke, and righteous Power defy'd.

What but Ambition, what but Pride, impell'd
Those faithless Spirits in the Realms above,
Who once in Glory and in Bliss excell'd,
Obedient only to the Law of Love,
To fill Heaven's peaceful Regions with Alarms,
"And dare," with impious Rage, "th' Omnipotent to Arms?"

But soon, "hurl'd headlong from th' aethereal Sky,"
For ever exil'd from those blest Domains,
(As sings our matchless Bard) "reserv'd they lie
In penal Fire and adamantine Chains;"
And there, convinc'd from whence their Sufferings spring,
Too late they see their Crime, and own th' Eternal King.
