Sepulchre tells the knell of market day,
The lowing herds from Smithfield now are free;
The drover homeward plods his weary way,
And leaves the town to many a nightly spree.

Now fades the glimmering streetscape on the sight,
And all that ere a solemn stillness holds,
Save where the butchers' carts wheel home their flight,
And drowsy watchmen fill the empty folds.

Save that from yonder gaol without a tower,
The sleepy turnkey, grumbling, doth complain
Of such as knocking at too late an hour,
Molest his iron arbitrary reign.

In yonder rugged walls for safety made,
Where giant ragstones frown in ponderous heap,
Each in his narrow cell till trial laid,
The rude disturbers of our sovereigns sleep.

The breezy call of Watch!  at midnight morn,
The pocket plunder'd in some gambling shed,
The charley's rattle, or the mail-coach horn,
No more shall send them grumbling home to bed.

For them no more shall pistol priming burn,
Nor flush-purs'd fencemen ply their ev'ning care,
Nor buxom blowings hail their rich return,
And frisk their fobs the envied swag to share.

Oft did bright Bramahs to their picklocks yield,
Their jemmies oft the stubborn bar have broke,
How jocund did they fan their prads a-field
How bow'd the trav'ler to their sturdy stroke!

Let not the honest mock their daring toil,
Their gin-fed joys in back-slum kens so big,
Nor rum beaks hear with magisterial smile,
The short, but flashy annals of a prig.

Can storied urn, or animated bust,
A better, or more useful lesson teach,
Than when he's dead, and die we know he must,
A gallant cracksman's last, last dying speech!

Nor you, ye proud, impute to these the fault,
That sometimes they are not inhumed at all,
But scorn the low sepulture of a vault,
And hang re-corded high in Surgeon's Hall.

Yet even these bones that you may recollect,
Some frail memorial is placarded nigh,
To tell you how with halters they were deck'd,
And when the covies suffered, and for why.

Their names, their years, some Sessions Paper's muse,
"Behaviour, Life, and Character," supplies,
And tells how gaming, naughty girls, and booze,
Seduce the youth who, without respite, dies.

Full many a gem of purest ray serene,
The dark unfathom'd fobs of gentry wear,
And many a hopeful youth with hand unseen,
Transfers it to his own peculiar care.

Perhaps in these neglected cells are laid,
Some hearts once pregnant with mercurial fire,
Hands that the very devil might have play'd,
And tongues that still may grace a living liar;

Some untried Turpin who with dauntless breast,
The double barrels of police withstood,
Some unfledged embryo Thurtell here may rest
As yet unguilty of his victim's blood.

For thee, famed Johnny Ketch, now gone and dead,
Who gave full swing to Heroes of the Gate,
Perchance by curious excitement led,
Some kindred noosemen may enquire thy fate;

Haply some hoary headed file may say,
"Oft have I seen him at the peep of dawn
Brushing, with hasty step, the mob away,
To lag his men on execution morn.

There on that spot where dangled many a wretch,
Whose felon forms were seen exposed on high,
Their listless legs he'd pull, their necks to stretch,
And pour a quartern to their last "Good bye."

Hard by each bar I've seen him wreckless stand,
The bar where thief is tried or liquor sold;
At each, half measures ne'er disgraced his hand,
Where prisoner was young, or max was old.

One morn I missed him, at the whipping post,
Down at the tap, and near his favorite tree;
Another came, and what amazed me most,
Nor in the dock, nor at the bar was he.

At length with dirges due, in sad array,
The Ordinary gave him to the dust;
Approach and read, for thou canst read the lay,
That is, if somebody should write it first.

THE EPITAPH.
Here rests his head beneath the shades of night,
An awful man, JOHN CHESHIRE, too well known
For keeping in suspence full many a wight,
Whene'er the law had mark'd him for its own!

Large was his bounty as his soul sincere,
He lov'd a drop, and though his heart was tough,
He gave a health whene'er he drank his beer,
And ne'er denied the wretched rope enough.

No further seek his merits to disclose,
Nor ask where, living, 'twas he made abode,
His line's extinct, and now he takes repose,
Somewhere 'twixt Newgate and Old Tyburn road.
