See with stern eye relenting vengeance weeps!
Her voice forbids the veins of war to bleed&mdash;
Ambition's plume in anguish'd tears she steeps,
And bids it droop, repentant, o'er each deed.

Now soft-ey'd pity's swelling breast shall heave,
When groans of sorrow sigh upon the air;
And the stern vet'ran seek the Briton's grave,
And drop o'er valor's urn an alien tear!

His war-worn cheek with feeling's glow shall burn,
When the fought-field with ling'ring steps he treads!
'Tis valor's task its vict'ries thus to mourn,
And weep the path the hand of honor leads.

In Rome's decline 'twas thus her vet'rans fought,
(&mdash; 'Ere in his tomb proud Otho's spirit slept&mdash;)
When by experience' rugged lessons taught&mdash;
Contending legions dropt their arms, and wept!

Ye sons of pow'r, let honor's debt be paid,
Let the brave soldier on your breasts repose;
Let gratitude enshrine the hero's blade,
Who snatch'd his falling country from her foes.

Ne'er let him want, who help'd that fame to rear,
Whence freedom bids the sons of wealth to smile:
Wipe from his hardy cheek that rolling tear&mdash;
Let it not fall &mdash; 'twill curse th' ungrateful soil!

'Twill blot the annals of a waste of fame,
And tarnish all your deeds of bright renown;
'Twill fix eternal stigma on your name&mdash;
The tears of virtue brightens but its own!

Ah!  could your coffers India's treasures know,
And gratitude in ev'ry bosom burn;
What wealth can charm the anguish'd eye of woe,
Or wake the hero in his silent urn.

What gold could sooth the widow'd mother's soul?
What &mdash; bid oblivion take the name of friend?
Could wealth or honors sorrow's nerve controul,
Why thus should grief the breast of Laurens rend?

In age unshelter'd &mdash; see him seek the grave&mdash;
Where the bright prospects of his life repose!
He finds no solace where the laurels wave,
And owns no fragrance in his grave-sprung rose!

Deaf as the adder is the ear of woe&mdash;
Dim is the sun, when sorrow spreads her wing&mdash;
Unheard the dulcet sounds of fame will flow,
Unseen will bloom the rosy bosom'd spring.

Ne'er can the story'd monument repay,
Where keen affection weeps a darling son:
Trophies but splendid misery display,
And fame but speaks how greatly we're undone.

I saw Cordelia, child of grief, recline&mdash;
The languid willow wav'dst at ev'ry sigh:
"Just Heav'n!" she cry'd &mdash; "if at thy stroke I pine!"&mdash;
&mdash;Wild was the roll of anguish in her eye!

"Dear was Chamont!  Oh!  sacred be the morn,
When last beneath this shade we bade adieu;
Bold on the wings of glory was he borne&mdash;
Now on his grave descends the Southern dew!

"Far, though from thee remov'd I sigh'd alone,
And in thy fall no hands dispos'd thy head;
Some brother soldier sure would bid a stone,
From dark oblivion guard a hero's bed!

"From these sad scenes where Mem'ry plants her stings,
Scenes of past joys! &mdash; Cordelia's feet shall fly&mdash;
She'll mark the spot 'mid Eutaw's murm'ring springs&mdash;
Such rights of woe e'en fortune can't deny!

"Unceasing tears shall then impearl thy tomb,
And nightly requiems to thy shade I'll breathe;
There shall thy myrtle and the cypress bloom,
And weave o'er thee their emblematic wreath!"
