Now dreary WINTER reigns with awful say,
The boist'rous winds obtrude their howling rage;
The snow-capp'd hills resume their froz'n array,
And pallid languor chills the frame of age!

Deep-chain'd in ice, the wat'ry world stands still,
The feather'd songsters shiver on the spray,
No murm'ring sound breathes from the accustom'd rill,
Nor past'ral sweetness chaunts the sylvan lay.

Yet, festive joy, hilarity's gay train,
And cloudless sunshine fill the sprightly hall,
While genial transports thrill in ev'ry vein,
Where pleasure smiles at fav'ring fortune's call!

There the rich board displays its purple stores,
And carrol'd glee the social hearth attends;
Love's treasures there diffuse their cordial pow'rs,
And Heav'n, well pleas'd, beholds uniting friends!

Heart-rending thought! &mdash; a moment shift the scene,
Survey the widow's and the orphan's home;
See the fond father's all-desponding mien;
See naked poverty and famine's dome!

There, plung'd in woe, the artist unemploy'd,
Weeps o'er his wretched family's despair;
His ev'ry stay, his ev'ry hope destroy'd,
And nought now left but hunger, cold, and care.

And shall Prosperity withhold its aid?
Shall sad Affliction supplicate in vain?
Shall not Heav'n's gifts impart to Heav'n be paid,
To smooth the bed of sickness and of pain?

Ye gen'rous sons of pity's fairest meed,
Whose soft humanity can feel for woe;
Be Mercy's boon to Charity decreed,
And teach the flinty heart like your's to glow.

The fireless cells of wretchedness explore,
For suff'ring virtue bid compassion bleed;
Chear for a moment adverse Fortune's door,
Give what you can, and Heav'n will bless the deed!

To hallow'd hours be lib'ral bounty shewn,
To Freedom's joys the mournful debtor draw;
See where he droops, all heartless and alone,
The weeping proof of sordid int'rest's law.

Twelve waning moons their silver lamps withdrew,
Since one bright gleam of cheering hope he found;
Since home, or festive happiness he knew,
Or press'd a softer pillow than the ground.

Far worse than death!  he drags a weary life,
By friends unseen, a stranger to the sun;
By cold, by famine, heart-corroding strife,
Contempt and insults, and despair, undone!
