Near where yon brook flows thro' the dell,
From whose green bank those upland meadows swell;
See where the Rector's splendid mansion stands,
Embosom'd deep in new enclosed lands,
Lands, wrested from the indigent and poor,
Because, forsooth, he holds the village cure:
A man is he whom all his neighbours fear,
Litigious, haughty, greedy, and severe;
And starving with a thousand pounds a-year.
Midst crouds and sports he pass'd his youthful prime,
Retirement had with him been deem'd a crime;
When the young blood danc'd jocund through his veins,
'Tis said his sacred stole received some stains.
By doctrine fashion'd to the varying hour,
By friends, or fawning, he lays claim to pow'r;
For three fat livings own his goodly sway,
Two wretched curates starve upon his pay.
Celestial Charity, that heavenly guest,
Could ne'er find entrance to his close locked breast:
The common vagrants pass his well known gate,
With terrors hasty step, and looks of hate;
For well they know the suffering poor he mocks,
Their wants are promis'd, bridewell or the stocks:
The soldier seam'd with honourable scars,
The sailor hasting from his country's wars,
In vain to him may tell their wo-fraught tale,
Their wounds, their eloquence, may  not prevail;
Tho' by their valour, he in peace remains,
His heart withholds the mite to sooth the wanderers pains.
Thus to depress the wretched is his pride,
His seeming virtues are to vice allied;
Backward to duty, hateful to his ears
Sound the church bells to summon him to pray'rs,
And like the wolf that stole into the fold,
And slew the sheep in wooly vestments roll'd:
Still bent on gain, he watcheth night and day,
To rend and make God's heritage his prey.
Call'd to the bed where parting life is laid,
With what reluctance is the call obey'd;
A few brief pray'rs in haste he mutters o'er,
For time is precious, and the sick man poor;
Fancy e'en now depictures to his eye
Some neighbour's pigs forth issuing from the sty,
Whose wicked snouts his new-form'd banks uproot,
Close in the ditch, and lop the hawthorn shoot.
Full many a luckless hog, in morning round,
He drives, deep-grunting, to the starving pound;
When in the church, that venerable place,
A sullen frown o'erspreads his haughty face;
A preacher's frown conviction should impart,
But oft his smile should cheer the drooping heart.
He blunders through the pray'rs with hasty will&mdash;
A school-boy would be whipt who read so ill&mdash;
Then mounts the pulpit with an haughty mien,
Where more of pride than godliness is seen;
Some fifteen minutes his discourse will last,
And thus the business of the week is past.
The service past, no friendly rustics run
To shake his hand &mdash; his steps the children shun;
None for advice or comfort round him press,
Their joys would charm not, nor their cares distress;
To notice them they know he's all too proud,
His liv'ried lacqueys spurn the village crowd.
When for the mourner heav'd his breast the sigh?
When did compassion trickle from his eye?
Careless is he if weal or wo betide,
If dues and tithes be punctually supplied.
Such is the man blind chance, not God, hath giv'n,
To be the guide of humble souls to Heav'n;
To preach of Heav'n he'll sometimes condescend,
But all his views and wishes earthward tend.
Like a tall guide-post tow'ring o'er the way,
Whose letter'd arms the trav'llers route display,
Fix'd to one spot, it stands upon the down,
Its hand still pointing to the distant town.
