Ah me!  what doleful sight it is, to ken;
The youth whom bad example has misled;
Who lost to virtue, speeds to guilty men,
On whom Despair her deadly damps has shed:
Lost in the snares the guilty ones have spread,
With pilfering hand he takes the labourer's gain;
'Till custom such fell apathy has bred,
No more he strives to shake off vice's chain,
But gives with reckless hand, each headstrong wish the rein!

And now grown old in vice, he thinks no sin
To rob the poor man of his little store;
Nay offers violence, with hideous din,
Leaving the poor wretch weltering in his gore!
Yet oft will conscience goad his bosom sore,
And paint the terrors of the bad-man's end;
But soon that goodly pang is felt no more&mdash;
The bowl he seizes, like a treacherous friend,
His guilty fears, and secret sorrows, to unbend.

Heaven's watchful eye, that lets no villain pass,
Soon marks the wretch amid his foul career:&mdash;
Life's final sand is trembling in the glass&mdash;
Despair and Horror lurk in silence near!&mdash;
And now the arm of Justice bids him fear&mdash;
His trial comes! &mdash; hope flies the culprit's soul;&mdash;
Ah!  then what pangs oppress, when on his ear
The sentence dread in thunder seems to roll!&mdash;
Hark! &mdash; was it fancy's voice? &mdash; or did a death-bell toll?

Now on death's brink &mdash; repentance comes too late&mdash;
Vain useless wishes that he ne'er had been;
Now round his neck is tied the knot of fate,
While the poor culprit sickens at the scene:
The platform sinks! &mdash; May God to mercy lean,
Nor in eternal woe the sinner shroud!&mdash;
May his sad fate impress in accents keen,
The bad man's end to all the gazing crowd,
And his last sigh of sorrow, echo still aloud.

Woe to those parents, who their children leave
To range in vice's circle, unconfin'd;
May they in sorrow meet with no reprieve&mdash;
May Fate his iron girdle round them bind:
Care should be theirs, to give the youthful mind
A taste for virtue in its early bloom,
Ere vice, around their hearts its wreath has twin'd;
Then will they fearless meet th' eternal doom,
Nor sink in wild despair, and horror to the tomb!
