O ye whose eyes shall wander o'er my page,
Seeking instruction, or amusement light;
Make due allowance for the writer's age,
Nor damp his genius in its early flight:
If in his song, there shine no passage bright,
Awakening ardour, or assuaging woe;
Reflect how few are born to breathe delight&mdash;
How few can bid the tears of pity flow,
Or raise devotion's flame, or triumph's prouder glow!

Should Love too often prompt an idle strain,
And nought but passion from his lips distil:
Should wanton Pleasure hide her sister Pain,
And drown reflection in the harp's wild thrill:
Judge not too harshly, but remember still,
That youth's the season of delight and joy,&mdash;
And think how few can chain th' impatient will,
When Pleasure calls, and Bliss that laughing boy;
Bids us in rosy sport our fleeting hours employ.

Should Fancy sometimes, judging from the past,
Wrap all the future in her darkest gloom;
And Hope, still trembling from the recent blast,
Shrink back from sight, or linger near the tomb:
Forgive his thoughts &mdash; for in our days of bloom,
Ere stern experience blunts the sense of pain;
The mind unconscious of its bitter doom,
More sharply feels affliction's goading chain&mdash;
The frown of want &mdash; of power &mdash; or scornful wealth's disdain.

The pangs he felt are in his song pourtray'd,
Love claim'd these fervent offerings as his due;
Yet still affliction's dictates were obey'd,
And wisdom blossom'd in his bosom too!
For many a change of mood that bosom knew&mdash;
Each short-liv'd passion linger'd there in turn,
And gave their colour to whate'er he drew:
Did sorrow murmur, or devotion burn,
Their mingling smiles or tears would fall on Fancy's urn.

Hence would he rove to no one theme confin'd,
As passion prompted, or as reason prest:&mdash;
Untaught to hide the feelings of his mind,
They burst spontaneous from his youthful breast!
And oh!  he harbour'd many an evil guest,
(As those are wont who list to Pleasure's lay)
And cherish'd passions that disturb'd his rest;
Yet time perhaps, may with a brighter ray,
Dispel those sable mists and renovate the day.

Then look with candour on his first essays,
Nor let thy judgment indiscreetly blame;
In time his genius may with brighter blaze
Illume his verses, and expand his fame!
Yet still, if doom'd to grovel on the same,
Let not thy censure too severely fall;
For know that Heaven alone can light the flame&mdash;
And that in vain we may on fancy call,
If 'tis to us deny'd, by Him, the God of all!
