Gaze round thee, Stranger, 'tis a hallow'd spot,
To Love and Beauty hallow'd; the old woods
A sacred gloom breathe forth; and, like the ribs
Of cloistral roof, the beechen boughs above
Their glossy leaves commingle, the gay sun
Of summer keeping out, and through the noon
Yielding a cool retreat, and shadowy haunt.
Hearken, &mdash; the river o'er its granite bed,
Rushing with wave of foam, and its deep sound
Speaking aloud tranquillity and peace!
The natural flowers around thee, bugloss blue,
Foxglove, and lychnis, blossom splendidly;
The broad fern, with its fingery leaf expands,
And the sloe-thorn is sprinkled with white flakes,
Like morning dews by magic frosted o'er.

Stranger!  to these a simple tale pertains,
A simple tale, but sad. &mdash; A village maid
Here parted with her soldier, to the wars
Repairing:  mournful was the parting scene,
Full of unspoken anguish, and deep sighs,
Heart-heaviness, and agonizing woe!
The past in all its beauty, on their souls
Rush'd bright &mdash; the many times that they had met,
The many times that they had wander'd here,
Beneath the evening star, or conscious moon;
The many times that they had felt, and told
How only for each other they could live.
The future &mdash; like a threatening angel stood,
Between their hearts, and happiness &mdash; long years
Of absence from each other &mdash; to the one
Danger, &mdash; and to the other grief,
The grief of heartlessness and hope deferr'd,
Than danger worse to suffer and abide.

'Twas even so. &mdash; The soldier sail'd away
O'er the broad ocean, to far foreign climes,
Where the orange blossoms:  valiantly
He fought, the gallant youth; and valiantly
He fell; and, dying, left his latest charge
To him, the friend, who weeping o'er him hung,
That he would tell the maiden of his love,&mdash;
Mary, the innocent, the beautiful girl,&mdash;
That sleeping he had dreamt of her; awake,
Had thought upon her through the livelong day;
That he died faithful to her, and implored
The God of love to cheer, and comfort her
When he was gone.

As, on summer morn,
Blue arrowy lightning darting from the cloud
On the young flower, so on young Mary's heart
Struck the intelligence of grief. &mdash; Cut off
At once, by one immitigable blow,
From earthly hope and happiness, at first
Loud was her grief, and violently strong,
As if it was beyond her to subdue
The fever of her spirit, or to stem
The gushing woe that overpower'd her heart.
She call'd upon him &mdash; who could not return!
She call'd upon him from his gory tomb,&mdash;
She call'd upon him through the livelong day,&mdash;
She call'd upon him, when the night winds sang
Around the casement, and the ivy leaves
Rustled with dull and melancholy sound.
She turn'd from solace as an empty word,&mdash;
From hope, as from a mockery, &mdash; she saw
Nought but despair in morning, noon, and night
Nought but despair, in all she look'd upon
She loath'd her life, &mdash; and coveted the tomb;
She only sought the grave, &mdash; the quiet grave,&mdash;
Forgetfulness, and a green resting-place.
But, by degrees, like stormy winds that sink
Softer and lower, of her voice the grief
Sank; and with still and melancholy eye,
That only lov'd the ground, silent she sate,
Through the unvarying day.  Within her soul
Brooded a calm, a nullity of thought,
A passionless void, a gloomy reverie,
The unbroken stillness of a cloudy day,
That knows nor breeze, nor sunshine.  A faint streak
Of light at length broke in, and gradually,
And steadily it strengthen'd, and it strove
With the surrounding darkness, and it shone
From heaven, and there for comfort did she look!

No sigh was utter'd now &mdash; no word she spoke,
She grew resign'd &mdash; but hope no more return'd,
Nor joy: &mdash; she loved the paths of solitude,
The paths which are around thee, stranger; here
She roam'd at noon, what time from flowers like these
The wild bee gathered honey, and the birds
Sang forth, with swelling hearts, from the green bough.
By yonder lake, beneath the chesnut tree,
Gazing she stood on the still waters, while
Unmark'd the trout leapt after the small fly,
Until the image of the flowers disturb'd,
And broken by the wrinkles, marr'd her gaze,
Then would she turn.

Whether the moon shone bright,
Or twinkling stars, on interlunar eves,
Spangled the cope of heaven; or boisterous winds
Sang through the forests, or the beating rains
Fell heavy on the house-top; by the hearth,
Whose blaze did flicker on her pale, wan cheek,
Ever and anon as if it boded death,
The Bible was her sole companion now;
And, through the guiltless blood of Him who died
On Calvary, she form'd her hope of Heaven.

Like a soft wave that, on a summer eve
Melts on the shore; a zephyr, through the shade,
That whispering sighs, and sinks to nothingness;
A snowy cloud that, sailing o'er the sky,
Wanes in the east to shadow, and decays;
A tender flower, on its autumnal stalk,
More colourless becoming day by day,
And drooping in the open light of Heaven;
So was it with poor Mary, till at length
She walk'd the earth a shadow among men;
Along her temples, like the snow-drop pale,
Were seen the blue veins branching, and her hand
The moon might have shone through it.

Who can quench
The gushing sorrows of a breaking heart,
Or lull despair to sleep? &mdash; One gloomy eve,
When gusty winds moan'd through the moonless sky,
And the leaves rustled, and the thunders roll'd
Nearer and nearer, muttering dismally;
And ocean, like a giant girt with chains,
Strove to o'erleap its barriers, roaring loud;
And nature seem'd prophetic &mdash; She awoke,
Smiling and fair, as from a gentle sleep,
And told the friends that hung around her conch,
That she had seen a vision, &mdash; that the youth,
Who loved her, and had perish'd far away,
Leaning upon an angel's arm, had come
To tell her that an amaranthine bower
In Heaven was blooming for them.

With a smile,
That spake a farewell to her sorrowing friends,
And bade them be of comfort &mdash; she departed.
