SONNET XX.
WRITTEN NEAR AN ANTIQUE ROMAN TOWER IN THE VICINITY OF TARRAGONA; SAID TO HAVE BEEN BUILT BY SCIPIO.
Here Rome on high her banners proudly wav'd,
By fell Ambition's madd'ning dream beguil'd:
Here godlike Scipio every danger brav'd,
And calmly 'mid the sanguine tempest smil'd.
And this lone tower his warlike soldiers pil'd,
To mark the spot where battle grimly frown'd;
Where Pain and Terror rais'd the outcry wild,
Amid the louder shout of Triumph drown'd!
"Time's gradual touch" the mouldering walls imbrown'd&mdash;
Rent the atlantes from their posts away&mdash;
Bade the long rye-grass creep the structure round,
And sculptur'd columns feel the rude decay:
Yet still it stands upon the sea-girt shore,
A proud memorial of the deeds of yore!

SONNET XXV.
See the fond babe its little arms extend,
Anxious to meet the mother's warm embrace;
While in its laughing features sweetly blend
The blush of beauty, and infantile grace.
Love, hope, and mildness, in the mother's face,
And fond affection, all their powers unite;
Yet still, a lingering tear does faintly trace
Its shining path-way from her eye so bright.
Say why did sorrow chill the fond delight
That softly rose within the mother's breast?
Perhaps misfortunes sad bedimm'd her sight,
And sorrow's portion could not be repress'd?
She knew the world to be an ocean wild,
And shed a tear of pity for her child!

SONNET XXXIII.
Dark is thy brow, but oh!  its shade reveals
That wild expression I so dearly prize;
While from beneath the fringe, that scarce conceals
Their wanton lustre, glance thy piercing eyes!
And there, insidious Love in ambush lies,
And bears on high a wand of mighty power;
Waving its magic o'er his enemies,
Who sink exhausted, as the pale wind-flower
Crouches beneath the rude autumnal shower.
Pining and sad, from thee they vainly seek
The lover's comfort, Hope! &mdash; alas!  their dower
Is nought but scorn, and woe, and patience meek.
Then feel some pity, if thou canst not love,
And let their grief, at least thy sorrow move.
