Here 'midst the glade of loneliest Indian wood,
Where circling palms shut out the rays of morn,
Are laid the British dead.

How deeply sad
The bosom waxes here!  no sacred pile
Here calls the heart from brooding o'er the grave,
Or spreads its holier influence round the scene.
No father here, beside the ancient church,
May shew his sons their honour'd grandsire's tomb,
Or point the spot where near that sacred dust
Would he recline, his worldly labours done:&mdash;
No haven this of rest where hopes and toils
Are glad resign'd, and mortals long to sleep:&mdash;
Nor this the place, where wearied traveller comes,
His long pursuit of wealth and greatness o'er,
To lay his aged head amid the dust,
Where sleep the bones of all his ancestry.
No: &mdash; lies the stranger here by strangers' side;
And here the traveller sinks whom death has seized
Amid the busy road, while cheerful hope
Urged eager course, and promised safe return.
No brother here nor sire, may pour the flood
Of sorrowing kindness o'er the wanderers grave;
A passing stranger's tears are all that flow!
And oft such stranger, here is mournful seen,
Like peasant wending forth at early dawn
From some impending rock the field to view,
Whence all the livelong night, the battle's roar
Had kept his trembling family awake,&mdash;
Who sees beneath the thousand fragments strew'd
Of war and death, &mdash; who hears the rising groan
Of wounded men, wide weltering far below,&mdash;
And weeps to think that each complaining voice
There raised unpitied, once, like him, could call
Some mother's fondest aid, or wife's beloved.

And yet, though here no sorrowing kinsman's hand
Performs the sacred rites; &mdash; no parent comes
To weep the son, who, 'mid his race of fame,
Has fall'n untimely; &mdash; yet the tribute sad,
Which mourning friendship here unceasing pours
Amid the stranger's land, even wakes the heart
To deeper sympathy.  How sad the tears
That silent fall o'er yonder sculptured tomb,
That speaks the love by British soldiers felt
For brother hero fall'n!  recounting sad
The social fire that warm'd his generous heart,
His deeds of worth, his patriot valour shewn!
What heart but feels their grief?  they saw him fall&mdash;
Companion tried in toils of fiercest war&mdash;
Associate loved in all their earliest hopes&mdash;
As fainting mariners, before the storm,
Behold some comrade brave (who strives on high
To furl the rending sail) shook furious down
Amid the boiling ocean &mdash; seen to swim
One moment blind, then all ingulph'd in death.

Beneath yon arching palm, where, 'mid the boughs,
The careless climber fills his gourd with wine,
A Briton's wife has found an Indian grave.&mdash;
She left her gay companions &mdash; left her home,
To bless, in Eastern clime, the lover's arms
Whose young attentions gain'd her virgin heart:
With venturous love she braved the Antarctic storm,
Nor shrunk from scorching rays of Indian sun.
She met her lover:  There on Indian shore
Stood he, to watch for her, whose parting smile
Still fill'd his heart, and oft had cheer'd his dream
In wild Mahratta tent, or Gorkah town;
But short the union given:  like budded rose,
But pluck'd to fade, her drooping head reclined
On breast beloved, and sunk to earliest death.

Perchance in lone recess the tomb is seen
Of him, whose valour gain'd to British arms
Their earliest triumph here.  Methinks I see
His spirit stern come hovering round, to mark
That empire, now complete, which he had plann'd
Through many a conflict fierce; ere yet his arm,
From roaming bands of wild insulting foe,
Could well the spot secure where now repose
His honour'd bones.  The firm resolve was his,
That, 'mid repeated failure, waits the hour,
When proud success shall blind o'erweening foes:&mdash;
The stern rebuke, that awes dissentient friends,
Yet not offends their pride; like fierce command
Of skilful pilot, 'mid the strengthening storm.
For common safety given; &mdash; the watchful eye,
That knows by instant glance the fated hour
To seize success, or rally from defeat:&mdash;
All these were his; and all were still required
'Mid savage clime, and floods of circling foes,
For British fame foundation meet to place,
Where now triumphal arch is raised secure,
And high display'd her sovereign banners shine.

Another tomb, for milder sage is rear'd,&mdash;
The man of peace:  in long succeeding time
Came he, with tranquil sway, to rule the plains,
By sterner virtues gain'd; to win the tribes
From superstitions dire, and wild misrule.
And deep his skill, to lure their fetter'd minds
From savage rites, by tyrant Brahmans forced
On man's reluctant heart; but, cautious still,
Aware how soon the jealous Indian shrinks
From meddling stranger, all the paths he shunn'd
Where angry prejudice stood centinel,
And no congenial feeling watch'd within
To aid his purposed good.  Before his tomb
The passing Indian bows, and loves to tell,
How he, that stranger sage, even deeper still
Than native Brahman, through the sacred book
Of Menu's laws had pierced; and oft could guide
The Pundit's wilder'd steps in Indian lore.

Behind yon shrubs, in corner verdant spread,
Lies crowd of nameless graves: &mdash; The soldier there,
Whose vigour pined before the Indian sun,
Now uncomplaining sleeps:  his languid eye
Had oft with envy seen his comrades call'd,
In cheerful bands, to join the active war,
And meet their speedier fate; whilst he on couch
Of lingering sickness lay, unheeded, weak,
With grief and conscious, uselessness oppress'd.
Here sleeps he now; his couch as softly green,
As his whom fate has graced with nobler death,
And given to fall, amid the eager shouts
Of gloom-dispelling fight: &mdash; the glory less
That decks his humble name; but softer far
The tear that pity sheds beside his tomb.

Here, too, her wanderings o'er, the soldier's wife
Has found at last a home:  her anxious ear
No more shall list to catch the dreadful sounds
Of distant fight; where each returning roll
Brought thrilling fear that there perchance in death
Had fallen her husband:  Ne'er again shall she
(Her tones of love, by weary faintness, changed
To wild impatience,) call her lagging child
To haste its steps, or shun the trampling crowd,
Amid the oppressive speed of soldiers' march.&mdash;
Her toils are o'er:  a refuge here is given
From grief and fear, from wants and shame, secure.

Sad scene, farewell!  thus numbering all thy tombs,
How oft have I the mournful evening passed,
Till all thy lonely paths were lost in shade.
