If one so humble may presume to raise
His lowly voice amid the Aeonian throng;
And strive intently to redeem those days,
That all unmark'd by deeds have pass'd along:
Spirit of Fiction aid my daring song,
Whilst I o'er magic ground attempt to range;
Through gloomy glens, and paths untrodden long,
Haunted by uncouth forms, and phantoms strange,
Whose shapes by wizard power have suffer'd wondrous change!

Yet all unmeet such venturous lay to frame
Am I, alas!  Apollo's humblest son:
Before me, too, great Spenser's mighty name
Shines like a beacon's light, and bids me shun
That path, but worthy to be trod by one!
Yet why should I ingloriously return,
My task allotted, and the work begun?
Why shrink from toil or danger, whilst I burn
For my young brow one solitary wreath to earn?

What can he know of life, who ne'er has pass'd
Beyond the limits of his native glen?
Safe from the peril Fortune's frown may cast
On those who mingle with their fellow-men:
Assoil'd from vice, because untempted then&mdash;
The world unknown, and therefore undesired,
Its dangerous pleasures placed beyond his ken
Yet is he less, far less, to be admired,
Than he, who, braving all, has yet unhurt retired.

Thus fares the bard, who, check'd by fear, confines
His lowly walk along the humbler dale;
While he who seeks in Fancy's hidden mines
For gems, which there perhaps their brightness veil;
Although no cheering smiles his labours hail,
Yet with this maxim may his grief restrain&mdash;
"In great attempts 'tis glorious e'en to fail;"
And he who toils, although it prove in vain,
Deserveth more than him who doth in sloth remain.

To know our strength we must exert its power,
The breeze must waken ere the bark will speed&mdash;
The seed must grow ere it produce a flower,
That flower unfold before the fruit succeed.
What timorous hand e'er snatch'd the glorious meed
That Fame holds forth to those who nobly dare?
When rose a guiding star their steps to lead?
What though from thence springs hate and carking care,
He who the glory gains, may well the envy share.

Oh!  first and latest of my hopes!  to spread
One little ray of light around my tomb;
And, like the midnight glow-worm, faintly shed
A beam of soften'd splendour through the gloom.
O'erweening boy!  and shall thy hand presume
To seize that harp thou hast not skill to sound?
Bethink thee of th' ambitious stripling's doom,
Whose daring brow the sun's bright circlet bound;
And shun th' unequal task, warn'd by the fate he found.

Yet Hope will prompt, and, waken'd by her strain,
Lo!  what enchanting shapes are seen to rise;
Soft as the hues that deck the glowing main,
When Sol's last beams are lingering in the skies,
And twilight's shades are falling!  Sunbright dyes
Are on their shifting raiments &mdash; the pure glow
Of beauty paints each feature, and their eyes
Beam with celestial light.  We gaze, and lo!
The brilliant vision fades &mdash; brief as the summer bow!

Beloved Enchantress!  through thy magic glass
The kindling shapes assume a brighter hue;
Like those in Banquo's mirror, many pass,
Spreading their countless forms before the view,
For ever varying, and for ever new.
What though deceived &mdash; shall we the charm forego
For truths our bosoms far too soon will rue?
Methinks 'twere better to be cheated so,
Than drag aside the veil, anticipating woe.

Then let me grasp the phantom while I may&mdash;
Too soon the future will its face unveil,
And all the sad reality display,
The darker prospect, and the deeper gale.
Perchance e'en now my hopes are doom'd to fail,
And dull Oblivion watches for her spoil:
Yet will I spread on high my venturous sail,
And, while around the angry surges boil,
Hold forth my daring course, however vain my toil.


CANTO I.
The evening sun behind the western hills
Declining, shed a melancholy ray;
While on the foaming streams, and tinkling rills,
His redd'ning splendours shone in proud array!
Sad setting colours of departing day,
Rayons of light that shine upon its grave&mdash;
Lingering in grief, as loath to melt away
From all those scenes to which they beauty gave,
Then sinking by degrees in twilight's shadowy wave.

Yet not serenely bright his glories shone,
In sullen majesty they now declined:
Across his face the gathering mists were blown,
In forms fantastic by the hollow wind.
Low in the southern welkin far combined,
The sable clouds their heavy masses roll'd
In fierce and blackening billows, or entwined
Fast mingling waves around the mountains old,
Wrapping their hoary heads in many a vapoury fold.

The air was still, save that the moaning gust
At times would raise a melancholy sound;
While distant far, the muttering thunder burst
Above the rifted crags, and steeps around!
Sublime in dread magnificence they frown'd,
As heedless of the awful sounds that broke&mdash;
Some were with tufts of fir and bramble crown'd,
On others, nothing but a splinter'd oak
In solitary grandeur stood, nor fear'd a second stroke.

Gloomy and sad was the surrounding scene,
There Desolation held her cheerless reign:
One might have thought man's foot had never been
Within the limits of this rocky chain,
But that between a mountain deft in twain,
A winding pathway shew'd its steep ascent&mdash;
Abrupt and rugged like the stormy main;
O'er hill and vale its wildering line was bent,
Ne seem'd for gilded car, ne prancing palfrey meant.

Yet even now upon this lonely path,
A valiant knight and gentle lady stray'd;
As if in haste to 'scape the tempest's wrath,
That in so wild, a spot them much dismay'd.
Full swift they journey'd, and for nothing stay'd,
Though faint and weary from their labour past;
For much they fear'd that night's involving shade
Would shroud the scene, which now was fading fast,
Before some welcome roof o'er them its shelter cast.

Lingering behind, on Palfrey white as snow,
A slender stripling dared the tempest's rage;
Upon whose cheek, health's pure suffusive glow
Bespoke the blossoms of a tender age!
That whitest spot on life's corrupted page,
When nought but smiles adorn the dimpled cheek,
Ere yet contending hopes begin to wage&mdash;
When in the dewy glance, divinely meek,
Nought but affections mild, and tender passions speak!

Gay smiling Sport laugh'd in his eye of blue,
While from its thin and snowy lid depending
In glossy pride, the shadowy lashes threw
A shade, those orbs from day's rude gaze defending:
His wanton locks in graceful curls descending,
Clung round his neck, or sported on his brow;
Now on the breeze their golden threads extending,
As if in playful wantonness, and now
Clustering in loving guise, like blossoms on the bough.

As curling mists, that on the summer sky
Serenely float before the orb of light,
And take a hue, when gliding swiftly by,
Than mountain snow, or bursting foam, more white
Thus shone his limbs, ne ever mortal wight
Could match the beauty of their rounded swell;
Soft as the downy peach, without a blight,
Smooth as the surface of a polish'd shell
Stol'n from fair Thetis' bower, or Amphitrite's cell.

Joy's wanton smile rose dimpling on his cheek,
Light as the zephyr on the glassy lake;
Then, moved to laughter by some boyish freak,
Warm from his soul the guileless mirth would break;
Parting those rosy lips, that one might take
For glossy berries glistening with the dew&mdash;
Or rosebuds, gather'd ere the sun's awake
To steal their balmy freshness &mdash; while in hue
Like snow-drops of the morn, his teeth look'd archly through.

A milk-white vest around his form was thrown,
Its silken folds scarce reaching to the knee;
Bound to his bosom by an azure zone,
Emblem right meet of faith and constancie,
Sith in the heav'ns that colour most we see:
Perch'd on his hand, or fluttering near his breast,
A gentle dove still bore him companie;
With dainty flowers, and sky-blue ribbons drest,
Of which full proud was he, ne cared to leave his nest.

Light as the down the thistle casts away,
Now would he swiftly speed across the gloom;
Then cease his flight, and on some bloomy spray
Adjust with sportive beak each ruffling plume:
Or sinking down amid the heath's wild bloom,
Shroud his white pinions from the gazer's eye;
Or in some mossy nook himself entomb,
Until the laughing boy would hasten by&mdash;
Then burst from his retreat, and spread his wings on high!

Oh then the sportive cry of wild delight,
Like to a streamlet gushing o'er its bed,
Would rise uncheck'd, the while in gentle flight
That playful dove kept circling round his head.
Anon the laughing boy, with arms outspread,
And eager eyes, that beam'd with mirthful pleasure,
Would snatch his favourite as he swiftly fled,
And to his bosom press his darling treasure,
Paying his thievish pranks with kisses without measure.

But now the glowing tints that gemm'd the west,
Mourning the sun, grew desolate and pale;
'Till coming forth yclad in sombre vest,
Meek Twilight threw o'er all her dusky veil.
Deep grew the distant hills, and length'ning dale&mdash;
The gathering clouds in threat'ning masses frown'd,
And o'er the darkling sky majestic sail;
While from afar the torrent's thund'ring sound
Broke with impetuous roar the calm that slept around!

Wide through the dusky air the raven flies,
Wakening the silence with his boding croak;
While the dull owl with solemn voice replies
From the dark bosom of a rugged oak,
And seems the coming tempest to invoke:
With swift, yet flickering wing, the bat arose,
And from his gloomy cell abruptly broke,
Vexing the dun air with uncertain blows,
As through the murky space he swift yet blindly goes.

Nor more was heard, 'till with an awful sound
Burst the loud thunder!  deepening at each crash
Its angry voice, and from the mountains round
Reverberating deeply, like the dash
Of Nile's broad cataract! &mdash; With brighter flash,
The lightning blazes, while a sudden gust
Rushes impetuous forth, and bends the ash,
Far mightier pine, and e'en the oak robust,
Scattering with giant strength their branches in the dust!

The mountains echoed, as the raging blast
Swept o'er their rugged bosoms bleak and hoar;
Gathering its awful strength, and rushing past
Like the huge billows on the rocky shore!
Anon it fell, and softer than before
Sunk with a hollow murmur down the vale;
Then rose again, and with an angry roar
Raged in the mountains, 'till the forests pale
Bow'd down their mighty heads, and trembled in the gale.

The rugged valleys in the storm rejoice,
Deep murmurs issue from the mountain pine;
The caves re-echo to the whirlwind's voice,
The torrents murmur as their waters shine;
And hill and vale, and rock and stream, combine
Their mingled breath in one mysterious sound;
As if the Mountain Spirit, laid supine,
Raged at the tempest, as it swept around
His dark majestic woods, and labyrinths profound!

Fast on the leaves the heavy rain-drops fell
With soft and pattering sound &mdash; then rush'd amain
From the dark rolling clouds, that seem'd to swell
Like ragged banners in some gloomy fane.
Chill'd by the angry blast, and plashing rain,
The wanderers gazed around in mute despair,
And for a moment check'd the guiding rein;
But nothing met their anxious glances there
Save dark and gloomy dells, and rugged mountains bare.

Yet still, as knowing well delay might breed
Some greater evil than their present plight,
Along the path the wearied train proceed,
And through the rising tempest urge their flight:
For now on all around, the shades of night
Like stormy waves roll'd desolate and dim;
Shedding such darkness, that the aching sight
Could scarce distinguish aught, save when the beam
Of pale electric fires diffused a transient gleam.

With hesitating pace their steeds advanced,
Such foamy torrents from the mountains gush'd;
Until before their eyes the lightning glanced&mdash;
Then bounding forth, along the path they rush'd
In wild affright, 'till on the rowels blush'd
The starting blood-drop from the trembling vein
Anon the spectral bat before them brush'd&mdash;
Scared at the unusual sound, they plunged again,
Tossing each wilder'd head, and wild dishevell'd mane!

Woman!  thou rainbow of man's little sky,
Bright o'er the scene a glorious arch extending;
Varying by turns each soft and beauteous dye,
And with the clouds their magic influence blending
Heaven's blessed gift to life its sweetness lending&mdash;
What were the world to man, without thy smile?
A dreary waste, in gloom and darkness ending
And he, more sad and desolate the while,
Than the poor shipwreck'd sailor, on his lonely isle!

E'en as the ivy round the oak entwines
Its timid stem, in many a gentle fold;
On Man fond Woman, as her strength, reclines,&mdash;
Her guard in danger, and in grief her hold.
By him her wily foes are soon controll'd.
Check'd by the valour which her smile instill'd;
That smile, which even makes the timorous bold,
And cowards scorn to fly the angry field,
Proud to be thought, for once, bright Woman's sword and shield!

Beloved office!  for her sake to brave
The battle's fury, and the avenging steel;
And, nerved with vigorous strength, spring forth to save
Her charms from all the fury war can deal.
Bounds not the bosom, when, with meek appeal,
She calls on man for succour or redress;
Turning her blue eyes, with a pious zeal,
From him to heaven! &mdash; craving God to bless
Her brave and generous champion with deserved success?

What pang can then fall deadlier on the heart,
Than when we view that form we hold so dear,
In some dark scene of misery bear a part,
Yet want the power to calm her rising fear?
Oh then, how sad to mark the falling tear,
That drops unconscious on the paly cheek;
The timid sigh of grief to overhear,
Or catch th' inquiring look &mdash; that, wildly meek,
Tells to the bursting heart far more than words can speak!

Hard were the bosom that unmoved could view
Those lovely eyes with Sorrow's tribute dim;
Oh never could that man in aught be true,
Or faith or constancy be found in him!
When Grief's full goblet overflows the brim,
Be ours the task the bitter draught to drain;
Since better 'twere that Man in every limb
Should feel the tortures of acutest pain,
Than one unbidden tear should Woman's eyelids stain.

Firm hand and gentle heart should knighthood bear:
Firm hand, in Woman's cause to wield the glave;
And gentle heart, to soothe her mind's despair,
Should Misery's fitful tempest round her rave.
Nor were these feelings mute in Eldred, brave;
Oh!  never did his faithful bosom feel
A sharper pang than grief that moment gave,
When thus he saw the whirlwind's loudest peal
On her so fondly loved its utmost fury deal.

In truth, her tender form but badly fared
Amid the tempest, that went howling past;
Yet still with patience meek its force she dared,
Brushing away the tears that trickled fast.
At times, her deep blue eyes she upwards cast,
Marking the darksome clouds, that hurried by
In gloomy billows, terrible and vast;
While from her breast th' involuntary sigh
Of prayer and supplication rose to Him on high!

Not so her little Page.  His cheek of bloom
Still bore the dimple Mirth delights to see;
And look'd as beautiful amid the gloom,
As the bright blossom on the leafless tree!&mdash;
In sooth, he was as gay as gay might be,
And seem'd unconscious of their evil plight;
Shouting full oft, with light and joyous glee,
When the red lightning, 'wildering and bright,
Scatter'd abruptly round its evanescent light.

Yet all observant of his Lady's fear,
While raved the storm, still near her side he kept,
And strove with gentle words her mind to cheer,
And soothed her anxious feelings as she wept;
Soft as the breath of morn, his accents crept
Upon her heart, and like th' Aeolian lyre,
When o'er its chords the murmuring breeze has swept,
Chased her fond terrors, and bade peace inspire
A blessed calm within, unmixed with earthly fire.

Still with impetuous fury burst the storm,
While gloomy darkness wrapt the lurid air!&mdash;
Nought could be seen, unless at times the form
Of ragged cliff, that in the lightning's glare
Abruptly shone! &mdash; or tree, whose branches bare
Shook, as the raging winds around did howl;
And seem'd as if by demon planted there,
To mark some wicked deed, abhorr'd and foul,
That had been wrought beneath, while shriek'd the boding owl!

Wearied and sad, the train pursued their way
Along that dangerous path so wild and lone;
Yet slow, for many a branch athwart them lay,
From its tough parent by the tempest blown.
Nor goading spur, nor rider's threat'ning tone,
Could now upon their jaded steeds prevail,
When, lo!  a flickering light before them shone
Amid the gloom, &mdash; like meteor of the dale,
That blazeth for a time, and then its torch doth veil.

As when a band of Pilgrims, who have stray'd
Full many a dreary mile on deserts bare,
Exhausted &mdash; weary &mdash; spiritless &mdash; dismay'd&mdash;
Who serve their last repast in mute despair,
And gaze around, yet see no refuge there:
If through the mist, that shrouds the distant space,
Gleam Mecca's sacred walls, what joy they share!
At once they bend, and thank the God of grace;
And then renew their task, with blithe and freshen'd pace.

E'en such the bliss the weary wand'rers felt,
When that pale glimmering cresset met their gaze:
To Him, whose bounteous hand the blessing dealt,
A silent prayer of thankfulness they raise.
Celestial Hope amid the storm displays
Her form, still brightest when Affliction's near;
And pictures to their view the cheering blaze
So vividly &mdash; they almost think they hear
The cry of human voices bursting on the ear.

And now a deep-toned bell, with hollow sound,
Loud on the blast its sullen accents flung;
The while each darksome cave, and dell around,
Return'd the echoes of its iron tongue.
With dazzling blaze that welcome light up-sprung,
Scattering abroad a wide and tremulous ray;
Now on the dripping leaves its radiance hung,
Now deck'd their path with many a sparkle gay,&mdash;
Like the moon's quivering light upon the ocean's spray.

At length, amid the darkness, they descried
An ancient Castle frowning on the steep,
Resting its ivy'd walls, in hoary pride,
Upon the mountain's verge, abrupt and deep.
Scath'd by the lightning's blaze, both tower and keep,
Like grisly giants, rear'd their forms aloof;
While arch and buttress propt each mould'ring heap,
And bore aloft its grey and massy roof;&mdash;
Slumbering like warrior old upon his shield of proof.

Unwearied Time upon its lonely walls,
With aspect stern, his endless vigils kept;
While grim Oblivion through the tottering halls,
Tim'rous and watchful, like a murderer crept,
And from each sculptured stone the record swept
With folded arms, and features meekly pale,
Majestic Fame beheld their deeds, and wept;
Then drawing o'er her face a sombre veil,
Retired with faltering steps in silence to bewail

Its mouldering battlements, o'ergrown with moss,
Yet mock'd the power which bade their strength decay,
And rear'd their forms above the antique fosse,
Stern vestiges of ages pass'd away:
Unholy Darkness crouch'd beneath them lay,
In blacker shadow, and with grim affright;
While from the loftiest tower a beacon's light
Shed through the dusky air its welcome light,&mdash;
Shining like Bethle'm's star, the Pilgrim's guide by night.

Beneath a gothic porch, with lofty towers
Flanking its gloomy entrance, wide and dim,
The train dismounted, while above them lowers
A mouldering arch propt on its pillars slim;
Mantle and shield, helm, crest, and scutcheon trim,
In rude emblazonry, above were seen;
While uncouth forms of saint and warrior grim,
On either side from sculptured niches lean,
Gazing on all below, with stern and threat'ning mein.

The folding-doors on massy hinges hung,
And render'd strong by many an iron clamp,
Wide in the whistling blast were open flung,
Their aged barriers mouldering with the damp.
Loud on the echoing floor their coursers tramp
And neigh, as conscious that their toil was past.
While, beaming far within, a brazen lamp,
Suspended from the lofty ceiling, cast
Around its dubious light, oft flickering in the blast.

As the bright hyacinth its blossom waves,
And shakes and trembles in the passing gale;
And feels, while yet th' ungentle blast it braves,
Its bloom departing, and its vigour fail:
Thus stood that lady mild, with features pale,
And limbs that scarce their burden could uphold;
Her dark hair streaming like a vestal's veil,
Its glossy threads in wild profusion roll'd
Adown her snowy neck, or on her bosom cold.

Through the large drops that gemm'd their silken lashes,
Like Vesper's light when shining on the deep,
With soft and magic beam her dark eye flashes,
(Brighter than violets, when the dew-drops steep
Their buds sky-tinctured, and in fragrance weep,)
Her wanton tresses, with the zephyr playing,
Like clustering tendrils o'er her forehead sweep,
Hiding its lovely form, and now displaying
The pure and spotless snow beneath their tangles laying.

The bleak and envious wind had rudely blown
The silken scarf from off her shoulders fair,
More bright and dazzling than the sea-spray thrown
From the dark rocks, while rage the billows there.
The cygnet flying through the sunny air,
No dusky spot its silvery whiteness staining,
Her snowy breast might emulate; or compare
With Parian stone, from Art's firm hand attaining
Perfection's latest touch, no speck or scar remaining.

On Eldred's arm her faltering steps she stay'd,
Hope's gentle smile rekindling on her face,
Like the soft dimple on the waters made
By the light insect in its airy chase;
Her white neck bending with benignant grace
Towards that laughing boy, who, by her side,
Tripp'd like a young gazelle, with joyous pace,
Fondling his favourite, &mdash; who, with wanton pride,
Flutter'd his glossy wings, and cooing soft replied.

Flush'd were his lovely cheeks, their hue resembling
The opening rose, when on its silken breast
The timid drops of dew are brightly trembling,
And blushing in their soft and fragrant nest.
Drench'd were his ringlets, while, beneath his vest,
His little heart rose bounding with delight;
And sweet smiles playing round his lips, express'd
The joy he felt, to see his lady bright
Thus shelter'd from the storm and darkly-per'lous night.

&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;
