Between thirty and forty years ago, the Della Crusca school was in great force.  It poured out monthly, weekly, and daily, the whole fulness of its raptures and sorrows in verse, worthy of any "person of quality."  It revelled in moonlight, and sighed with evening gales, lamented, over plucked roses, and bid melodious farewells to the "last butterfly of the season."  The taste prevailed for a time; the more rational part of the public, always a minority, laughed and were silent; the million were in raptures, and loud in their raptures.  The reign of "sympathy" was come again, &mdash; poetry, innocent poetry, had at length found out its true language.  Milton and Dryden, Pope and the whole ancestry of the English Muse, had strayed far from nature.  They were a formal and stiff-skirted generation, and their fame was past and forever.  The trumpet of the morning paper, in which those "inventions rich" were first promulgated, found an echo in the more obscure fabrications of the day, and milliners' maids and city apprentices pined over the mutual melancholies of Arley and Matilda.  At length, the obtrusiveness of this tuneful nonsense grew insupportable; a man of a vigorous judgment shook off his indolence, and commenced the long series of his services to British literature, by sweeping away, at a brush of his pen, the whole light-winged, humming, and loving population.  But in this world folly is immortal; one generation of absurdity swept away, another succeeds to its glories and its fate.  The Della Crusca school has visited us again, but with some slight change of localities.  Its verses now transpire at one time from the retreats of Cockney dalliance in the London suburbs; sometimes they visit us by fragments from Venice, and sometimes invade us by wainloads from Pisa.  In point of subject and execution, there is but slight difference; both schools are "smitten with nature, and nature's love," run riot in the intrigues of anemonies, daisies, and buttercups, and rave to the "rivulets proud, and the deep blushing stars."  Of the individuals in both establishments, we are not quite qualified to speak, from the peculiarity of their private habits; but poor Mrs. Robinson and her correspondents are foully belied, if their moral habits were not to the full pure as those of the Godwinian colony, that play "the Bacchanal beside the Tuscan sea."  But we must do the defunct Della Crusca the justice to say, that they kept their private irregularities to themselves, and sought for no reprobate popularity, by raising the banner to all the vicious of the community.  They talked nonsense without measure, were simple down to the lowest degree of silliness, and "babbled of green fields" enough to make men sicken of summer, but they were not daring enough to boast of impurity; there was no pestilent hatred of every thing generous, true, and honourable; no desperate licentiousness in their romance; no daring and fiend-like insult to feeling, moral ties, and Christian principle.  They were foolish and profligate, but they did not deliver themselves, with the steady devotedness of an insensate and black ambition, to the ruin of society.
We have now to speak of Mr. P. B. Shelley and his poem.  Here we must again advert to the Della Crusca.  One of the characteristics of those childish persons was, the restless interest which they summoned the public to take in every thing belonging to their own triviality.  If Mrs. Robinson's dog had a bad night's repose, it was duly announced to the world; Mr. Merry's accident in paring his nails solicited a similar sympathy; the falling off of Mrs. R.'s patch, at the last ball, or the stains on Mr. M.'s full-dress coat, from the dropping of a chandelier, came before the earth, with praise-worthy promptitude.  All within their enchanted ring was perfection; but there the circle of light and darkness was drawn, and all beyond was delivered over to the empire of Dulness and Demogorgon.  The New School are here the humble imitators of those original arbiters of human fame.
The present story is thus: &mdash; A Mr. John Keats, a young man who had left a decent calling for the melancholy trade of Cockney-poetry, has lately died of a consumption, after having written two or three little books of verses, much neglected by the public.  His vanity was probably wrung not less than his purse; for he had it upon the authority of the Cockney Homers and Virgils, that he might become a light to their region at a future time.  But all this is not necessary to help a consumption to the death of a poor sedentary man, with an unhealthy aspect, and a mind harassed by the first troubles of versemaking.  The New School, however, will have it that he was slaughtered by a criticism of the Quarterly Review. &mdash; "O flesh, how art thou fishified!" &mdash; There is even an aggravation in this cruelty of the Review &mdash; for it had taken three or four years to slay its victim, the deadly blow having been inflicted at least as long since.  We are not now to defend a publication so well able to defend itself.  But the fact is, that the Quarterly finding before it a work at once silly and presumptuous, full of the servile slang that Cockaigne dictates to its servitors, and the vulgar indecorums which that Grub Street Empire rejoiceth to applaud, told the truth of the volume, and recommended a change of manners and of masters to the scribbler.  Keats wrote on; but he wrote indecently, probably in the indulgence of his social propensities.  He selected from Boccacio, and, at the feet of the Italian Priapus, supplicated for fame and farthings.

"Both halves the winds dispersed in empty air."

Mr. P. B. Shelly having been the person appointed by the Pisan triumvirate to canonize the name of this apprentice, "nipt in the bud," as he fondly tells us, has accordingly produced an Elegy, in which he weeps "after the manner of Moschus for Bion."  The canonizer is worthy of the saint. &mdash; "Et tu, Vitula!" &mdash; Locke says that the most resolute liar cannot lie more than once in every three sentences.  Folly is more engrossing; for we could prove, from the present Elegy, that it is possible to write two sentences of pure nonsense out of every three.  A more faithful calculation would bring us to ninety-nine out of every hundred, or, &mdash; as the present consists of only fifty-five stanzas, &mdash; leaving about five readable lines in the entire.  It thus commences:&mdash;

O weep for Adonais &mdash; he is dead!
O, weep for Adonais!  though our tears
"Thaw not the frost" which binds so dear a head!
And thou, sad hour!  selected from all years
"To mourn our loss," rouse thy obscure compeers,
"And teach them thine own sorrow, say with me
Died" Adonais!  till the "future does
Forget the past."  His fate and fame shall be
"An echo and a light!!" unto eternity.

Now, of this unintelligible stuff the whole fifty-five stanzas are composed.  Here an hour &mdash; a dead hour too &mdash; is to say that Mr. J. Keats died along with it!  yet this hour has the heavy business on its hands of mourning the loss of its fellow-defunct, and of rousing all its obscure compeers to be taught its own sorrow, &amp;c.  Mr. Shelley and his tribe have been panegyrized in their turn for power of language; and the man of "Table-talk" swears by all the gods he owns, that he has a great command of words, to which the most eloquent effusions of the Fives Court are occasionally inferior.  But any man may have the command of every word in the vocabulary, if he will fling them like pebbles from a sack; and even in the most fortuitous flinging, they will sometimes fall in pleasing though useless forms.  The art of the modern Della Cruscan is thus to eject every epithet that he can conglomerate in his piracy through the Lexicon, and throw them out to settle as they will.  He follows his own rhymes, and shapes his subject to the close of his measure.  He is a glutton of all names of colours, and flowers, and smells, and tastes, and crowds his verse with scarlet, and blue, and yellow, and green; extracts tears from every thing, and makes moss and mud hold regular conversations with him.  "A goose-pye talks," &mdash; it does more, it thinks, and has its peculiar sensibilities, &mdash; it smiles and weeps, raves to the stars, and is a listener to the western wind, as fond as the author himself.
On these principles, a hundred or a hundred-thousand verses might be made, equal to the best in Adonais, without taking the pen off the paper.  The subject is indifferent to us, let it be the "Golden age," or "Mother Goose," &mdash; "Waterloo," or the "Wit of the Watchhouse," &mdash; "Tom Thumb," or "Thistlewood."  We will undertake to furnish the requisite supply of blue and crimson daisies and dandelions, not with the toilsome and tardy lutulence of the puling master of verbiage in question, but with a burst and torrent that will sweep away all his weedy trophies.  For example &mdash; Wontner, the city marshal, a very decent person, who campaigns it once a year, from the Mansion-house to Blackfriars bridge, truncheoned and uniformed as becomes a man of his military habits, had the misfortune to fracture his leg on the last Lord Mayor's day.  The subject is among the most unpromising.  We will undertake it, however, (premising, that we have no idea of turning the accident of this respectable man into any degree of ridicule.)

O WEEP FOR ADONAIS, &amp;c.
O weep for Wontner, for his leg is broke,
O weep for Wontner, though our pearly tear
Can never cure him.  Dark and dimly broke
The thunder cloud o'er Paul's enamelled sphere,
When his black barb, with lion-like career,
Scatter'd the crowd. &mdash; Coquetting Mignionet,
Thou Hyacinth fond, thou Myrtle without fear,
Haughty Geranium, in your beaupots set,
Were then your soft and starry eyes unwet?

The pigeons saw it, and on silver wings
Hung in white flutterings, for they could not fly,
Hoar-headed Thames checked all his crystal springs,
Day closed above his pale, imperial eye,
The silken Zephyrs breathed a vermeil sigh.
High Heavens!  ye Hours!  and thou Ura-ni-a!
Where were ye then?  Reclining languidly
Upon some green Isle in the empurpled Sea,
Where laurel-wreathen spirits love eternally.

Come to my arms, &amp;c.

We had intended to call attention by italics to the picturesque of these lines; but we leave their beauties to be ascertained by individual perspicacity; only requesting their marked admiration of the epithets "coquetting," "fond," "fearless," and "haughty," which all tastes will feel to have so immediate and inimitable an application to mignionet, hyacinths, myrtles, and geraniums.  But Percy Byshe has figured as a sentimentalist before, and we can quote largely without putting him to the blush by praise.  What follows illustrates his power over the language of passion.  In the Cenci, Beatrice is condemned to die the for parricide, &mdash; a situation that, in a true poet, might awaken a noble succession of distressful thought.  The mingling of remorse, natural affection, woman's horror at murder, and alternate melancholy and fear at the prospect of the grave, in Percy Byshe works up only this frigid rant:&mdash;

&mdash;How comes this hair undone?
Its wandering strings must be what blind me so,
And yet I "tied it fast!"&mdash;

The sunshine on the floor is "black!" The air
Is changed to vapours, such as the dead breathe
In charnel pits!  Poh!  I am choak'd!
There creeps
A clinging, black, contaminating mist
About me, &mdash; 'tis substantial, heavy, thick.
I cannot pluck it from me, for it glues
My fingers and my limbs to one another,
And eats into my sinews, and dissolves.
My flesh to a pollution," &amp;c. &amp;c.

So much for the history of "Glue" &mdash; and so much easier is it to rake together the vulgar vocabulary of rottenness and reptilism, than to paint the workings of the mind.  This raving is such as perhaps no excess of madness ever raved, except in the imagination of a Cockney, determined to be as mad as possible, and opulent in his recollections of the shambles.
In the same play, we have a specimen of his "art of description."  he tells of a ravine&mdash;

And in its depths there is a mighty Rock,
Which has, from unimaginable years,
Sustain'd itself with "terror end with toil!"
Over a guiph, and with "the agony
With which it clings," seems slowly coursing down;
Even as a wretched soul, hour after hour,
Clings to the mass of life, yet clinging "leans,"
And leaning, makes "more dark" the dread abyss
In which it fears to fall.  Beneath this crag,
"Huge as despair," as if "in weariness,"
The "melancholy" mountain "yawns" below," &amp;c. &amp;c.

And all this is done by a rock &mdash; What is to be thought of the terror of this novel sufferer &mdash; its toil &mdash; the agony with which so sensitive a personage clings to its paternal support, from "unimaginable" years?  The magnitude of the "melancholy" and injured monster is happily measured by its being the "exact size of despair!"  Soul becomes substantial, and "darkens a dread abyss."  Such are Cockney darings before "the Gods, and columns" that abhor mediocrity.  And is it to this dreary nonsense that is to be attached the name of poetry?  Yet on these two passages the whole lauding of his fellow-Cockneys has been lavished.  But Percy Byshe feels his hopelessness of poetic reputation, and therefore lifts himself on the stilts of blasphemy.  He is the only verseman of the day, who has dared, in a Christian country, to work out for himself the character of direct ATHEISM!  In his present poem, he talks with impious folly of the "envious wrath" of man or GOD!  Of a

Branded and ensanguined brow,
Which was like "Cain's" or CHRIST'S.

Offences like these naturally come before a more effective tribunal than that of criticism.  We have heard it mentioned as the only apology for the predominant irreligion and nonsense of this person's works, that his understanding is unsettled.  But in his Preface, there is none of the exuberance of insanity; there is a great deal of folly, and a great deal of bitterness, but nothing of the wildness of his poetic fustian.  The Bombastes Furioso of these stanzas cools into sneering in the preface; and his language against the death-dealing Quarterly Review, which has made such havoc in the Empire of Cockaigne, is merely malignant, mean, and peevishly personal.  We give a few stanzas of this performance, taken as they occur.

O weep for Adonais!  He is dead!
Weep, melancholy mother, wake and weep;
Yet "wherefore?"  quench within their burning bed
Thy "fiery" tears, and let thy "loud" heart keep
Like his, a mute and uncomplaining sleep,
For he is gone, where all things wise and fair
"Descend!"  Oh dream not that the amorous deep
Will yet restore him to the vital air.
Death "feeds" on his "mute voice," and "laughs" at our despair.

The seasons and a whole host of personages, ideal and otherwise, come to lament over Adonais.  They act in the following manner:

Grief made the young Spring "wild," and she threw down
Her kindling buds, as if the Autumn were,
Or they dead leaves, since her delight is flown,
For whom should she have wak'd the sullen year?
To Phoebus was not Hyacinth so dear,
Nor to himself Narcissus, as to both,
Thou, Adonais; wan they stand, and sere,
Amid the drooping comrades of their youth,
With dew all turn'd to tears, odour to sighing ruth.

Here is left, to those whom it may concern, the pleasant perplexity, whether the lament for Mr. J. Keats is shared between Phoebus and Narcissus, or Summer and Autumn.  It is useless to quote those absurdities any farther en masse, but there are flowers of poesy thickly spread through the work, which we rescue for the sake of any future Essayist on the Bathos.

ABSURDITY.
The green lizard, and the golden snake,
Like unimprison'd flowers out of their trance awake.
An hour&mdash;

Say, with me
Died Adonais, "till the Future dares
Forget the Past" &mdash; his fate and fame shall be
An "echo" and a "light" to all eternity.

Whose "tapers yet" burn there the night of Time,
For which "Suns perish'd!"

Echo, &mdash; pined away
Into a "shadow" of all "sounds!"

That mouth whence it was wont to draw the breath
Which gave it strength to pierce the guarded wit!

"Comfortless!"
As "silent" lighting leaves the starless night.

Live thou whose "infamy" is not thy "fame!"

Thou "noteless" blot on a remembered name!

We in mad trance "strike with our spirit's" knife,
"Invulnerable nothings!"

Where lofty thought
Lifts a young heart above its mortal lair,
And love, and life, contend in it &mdash; for what
Shall be its earthly doom &mdash; The dead live there,
And in move, like "winds of light," on dark and stormy air.

Who mourns for Adonais &mdash; oh!  come forth,
Fond wretch!  and know thyself and him aright,
"Clasp" with thy "panting" soul the "pendulous Earth!"

Dart thy spirit's light
Beyond all worlds, until its "spacious might"
"Satiate" the void "circumference!"

Then sink
Even to a point within our day and night,
And keep thy heart "light," lest it make "thee sink,"
When "hope has kindled hope," and "lured thee to the brink."

A light is past from "the revolving year;"
"And man and women," and what still is dear
Attracts to crush, repels to make thee wither.

That benediction, which th' "eclipsing curse"
Of birth can quench not, that sustaining love,
Which, through "the web of being blindly wove,"
By "man, and beast, and earth, and air, and sea!"
Burns bright or dim, as each are mirrors of
The "fire" for which all "thirst."

"Death" makes, as becomes him, a great figure in this "Lament," &mdash; but in rather curious operations.  He is alternately a person, a thing, nothing, &amp;c.

He is, "The coming bulk of Death,"
Then "Death feeds on the mute voice."

A clear sprite
Reigns over Death&mdash;

Kingly Death
Keeps his pale court.

Spreads apace
The "shadow" of "white" Death.

The damp Death
Quench'd its caress&mdash;

Death
"Blush'd to annihilation!"

Her distress
Roused Death.  Death rose and smiled&mdash;

He lives, he wakes, 'tis Death is "dead!"

As this wild waste of words is altogether beyond our comprehension, we will proceed to the more gratifying office of giving a whole, unbroken specimen of the Poet's powers, exercised on a subject rather more within their sphere.  The following Poem has been sent to us as written by Percy Byshe, and we think it contains all the essence of his odoriferous, colorific, and daisy-enamoured style.  The motto is from "Adonais."

ELEGY ON MY TOM CAT.
And others came. &mdash; Desires and Adorations,
Wing'd Persuasions, and veil'd Destinies,
Splendours, and Wooing, and glimmering Incantations
Of hopes and fears and twilight Phantasies;
And Sorrow, with her family of Sighs;
And Pleasure, "blind" with tears, led by the "gleam"
Of her own "dying smile instead of eyes!"

ELEGY.
Weep for my Tomcat!  all ye Tabbies weep,
For he is gone at last!  Not dead alone,
In flowery beauty sleepeth he no sleep;
Like that bewitching youth Endymion!
My love is dead, alas, as any stone,
That by some violet-sided smiling river
Weepeth too fondly!  He is dead and gone,
And fair Aurora, o'er her young believer,
With fingers gloved with roses, doth make moan,
And every bud its petal green doth sees;
And Phoebus sets in night for ever, and for ever!
And others come!  ye Splendours!  and ye Beauties!
Ye Raptures!  with your robes of pearl and blue;
Ye blushing Wonders!  with your scarlet shoe-ties;
Ye Horrors bold!  with breasts of lily hue;
Ye Hope's stern flatterers!  He would trust to you,
Whene'er he saw you with your chesnut hair,
Dropping sad daffodils; and rosepinks true!
Ye Passions proud!  with lips of bright despair;
Ye Sympathies!  with eyes like evening star,
When on the glowing east she rolls her crimson car.

Oh, bard-like spirit!  beautiful and swift!
Sweet lover of pale night; when Luna's lamp
Shakes sapphire dew-drops through a cloudy rift;
Purple as woman's mouth, o'er ocean damp;
Thy quivering rose-tinged tongue &mdash; thy stealing tramp;
The dazzling glory of thy gold-tinged tail;
Thy whisker-waving lips, as o'er the swamp
Rises the meteor, when the year doth fail,
Like beauty in decay, all, all are flat and stale.

This poem strikes us as an evidence of the improvement that an appropriate subject makes in a writer's style.  It is incomparably less nonsensical, verbose, and inflated, than Adonais; while it retains all its knowledge of nature, vigour of colouring, and felicity of language.  Adonais has been published by the author in Italy, the fitting soil for the poem, sent over to his honoured correspondents throughout the realm of Cockaigne, with a delightful mysteriousness worthy of the dignity of the subject and the writer.
