Ah!  why beneath the castle's banner'd walls
No longer swells the harp's harmonious lay?
Ah!  why no longer 'mid the festal halls,
Shines the bright goblet in the taper's ray?

No more the weary Minstrel seeks repose,
Majestic bending like a faded flower;
No more his grateful song, sublimely flows,
To mark the glory of the passing hour.

Low in the mouldering grave, the sons of song,
Their faded temples in the night-dew steep;
Yet still remembrance shall the notes prolong,
And rising genius o'er their ashes weep.

There hangs a harp (the Minstrel's pride of yore,
Ere yet the sons of song had sought the tomb)
Beneath a lofty oak on Erin's shore,
Whose spreading branches cast an awful gloom.

And still when Evening binds her dewy wreath,
What time the moon her crescent pale displays;
Through its lone strings the winds all-softly breathe,
And sadly sweet a pensive measure raise.

Now o'er each trembling wire they sweep along,
Whilst bold and strong the varied notes arise:
Now faintly breathe, like Philomela's song,
When on the midnight breeze it softly dies.

Such, as when morning gems the fields with dew,
To themes unknown some spirit tunes the lyre;
As fondly blushing with celestial hue,
The mantling clouds to eastern spheres retire.

Lull'd by its power, the western winds are still'd,
As sinks the plaintive measure on the gale;
E'en Sorrow pensive stands, with wonder fill'd,
Nor seeks to move compassion by her tale.

Beneath the shade when evening veils the skies,
The child of misery on the turf reclines;
Marking the spangled Heavens with tearful eyes,
Where world on world in liquid splendor shines.

Slow on the night-breeze rising!  wild, yet sweet,
A strain celestial softly floats around;
A lay that makes the heart of Pity beat,
And Sorrow cast her tearful eyes to ground.

Sooth'd into peace &mdash; forgetful of his woes&mdash;
Enrapt &mdash; the mourner listens to the strain;
As wild, yet soft, the aerial music flows,
While echoing rocks return the notes again.

And still 'tis said, when midnight spreads its shade,
And Cynthia lifts her lucid orb on high;
The sacred bards in sable robes array'd,
Descend on moon-beams from the spangled sky.

There, as their fingers tremble on the strings,
They wake with tuneful breath the sacred song;
While western breezes shake their playful wings,
And far and wide the lingering notes prolong.

Celestial Harp! &mdash; long may thy hallow'd strings
Meet the soft murmurs of the western wind:
Still sooth the mournful heart Affliction brings,
And burst the band of sorrow Grief has twin'd.
