How beautiful upon this verdant bank
The sunshine slumbers!  how the vernal trees
Expand their foliage fresh and young!  how clear
Through yonder vale glitters the silver stream!
How pleasant 'tis to mark the labouring ploughs
Traverse the field, and leave a sable track,
While merrily behind the driver stalks,
Whistling in thoughtless vacancy of mind;
The small birds, as it were a holiday,
Sing forth, with carol sweet, from every bough;
And larks, ascending to the clear blue sky,
Suffuse the air with music.

None can feel
But those, above whose head misfortune's clouds
Have muster'd in their gloom, how sweet it is,
Thus, &mdash; after long years spent in the rough world,
'Mid scenes, in which affection has small share,&mdash;
To stand, as I do now, and gaze upon
The landscape graven on the youthful mind
In all its beauty; render'd far more dear
By thousand thoughts with boyhood's glowing years
Close intertwined; and thus remaining still,
Heedless of all the tempests that have pass'd,
In sunshine, and in vernal beauty dress'd.
And thou, lone church-yard, with thy yew-trees dark,
The children of departed centuries,
Often, in absence, have I seen thy sward
With mountain daisies, and with natural blooms
Prank'd sweetly; these white monumental stones,
And that retired and unassuming church,
Which, like a pious man, amid the mob
Of cities, and the bustle of the world,
Dwells in the beauty of its holiness,
Untainted, undefiled. &mdash; Oh, quiet spot!
How often have my visions pictured thee!
How often have I deem'd that, when at length
These eyes shall in their mortal slumbers close,
Here &mdash; here, above all other spots of earth,
My body would take up its last abode;
No marvel! &mdash; but be still my throbbing heart;
Be tranquil, and resign'd: &mdash; now to my task.

Green sward, that in thy bosom hidest deep
The form, that never more can bless mine eyes
Again; &mdash; with bursting heart, and tearful gaze,
I stand with thee; and, on the iron rails
That compass thee about, I, leaning, muse
Upon my past, and ship-wreck'd happiness.&mdash;
Oh where art thou, the dove, that, to mine ark,
Brought duly home the olive-bough of peace?
Oh where art thou, of whom in youth I dream'd
(Nor erring in my thought,) that, without thee,
This world could be a mockery alone,
A scene of desolation, cold and bleak,
And cheerless, as the everlasting gloom
Of hyperborean realms? &mdash; Elizabeth!
Dear name that, now, art but an empty sound,
And hast, at least for my deluded heart,
No meaning, save that for a talisman
It served me once, and turn'd all thoughts to joy!

When thou wert drooping on thy death-bed laid,
And Sickness like a Demon haunted thee,
Turning all feelings, and all thoughts to pain,
I was not near to hang beside thy couch
In tenderness, and in anxiety; to sooth
The unrepining ills; to press thy hand
Against my lips, and tell that all my hopes
Of happiness on earth were fix'd in thee!
To mention o'er the many happy scenes
Which we have view'd together; and to say,
Surely the same might be enjoy'd again!
I was not near to watch, in tenderness,
Life's fluttering, dying spark; to mark the set
Of thy too rapid day's descending sun;
To catch thy latest sigh; and bid thee hear,
That though on earth a thousand years were mine,
One only love my heart would ever own!

When last I left my home, what wert thou then?
A very picture of all loveliness:&mdash;
The glow of health play'd on the varying cheek,
And round thy ruby lips; thy hazel eye,
Through its long silken lashes, sparkled bright;
And I have gazed upon thy snowy brow;
And on the brightness of thine auburn hair;
And thought ('twas but a dream,) that many days
Of joy &mdash; and sunshine &mdash; and prosperity&mdash;
Would bless thee, and that thy reflected smile,
Through many years, would make me blest indeed.
In hope we parted; &mdash; 'twas a summer eve,
And the long lines of the decaying light
Fell sombrely upon the crimson'd trees;
And, ever and anon, a murmuring sound
Rose from the falling stream.  The blackbird, perch'd
On the tall sycamore, its pensive hymn
Chaunted to usher in the shades of eve.
Yea!  even then, as the last lingering look
I fix'd on thee, departing, something pass'd&mdash;
As if a shadow &mdash; o'er my drooping heart,
To omen that I ne'er should see thee more!

Amid the flap of the distending sails,
Mid social converse, and the roar of waves,
And the long vista of the ocean green,
And the blue beauty of receding isles,
I strove to overcome my sinking heart,
And hush my fears to peace.  Yet, often-times,
As coastways we pursued, and cape and bay
Alternately appeared, and pass'd behind;
While soar'd the sea-gull with a wailing shriek,
My gaze hath westward follow'd it, and wish'd&mdash;
What fondness will not lovers when they love!&mdash;
That it could bear a blessing unto thee,
And bring me thine, returning.

Months pass'd o'er;
Time with a healing touch did salve my fears;
And Friendship wooed me through the livelong day:
Yet, oft-times, when I paced the midnight deck,
And, save the murmuring billows, all was still;
When plaintively, amid the cordage, piped
The loud-breath'd winds, and, twinkling overhead,
Ten thousand lustres studded the blue arch,
Elizabeth, my thoughts did wander home,&mdash;
To thee they stray'd, they dwelt on thee alone!
I thought me of our sweet autumnal walks
By the green wood, or o'er the yellow sands;
Of our long cherish'd, and unfaded love;
Of the vows pledg'd in early youth: &mdash; I thought&mdash;
Alas!  it was a mockery of hope!&mdash;
That, when again our keel did touch the strand
Of Scotland, I should clasp thee in the flush
Of beauty, and should hail my wedded wife!

Long on the Indian strand our steps delay'd;
And I (for still a supernatural dread
Did haunt me night and day!) did pine in heart,
Yea long to traverse the wide seas again,
To brave the adverse elements, and thus
From these external impulses subdue
The agitations of the heart; we plough'd
Month after month the interminable main,
Saw but the sun, and sky, and the long clouds
That sometimes floated o'er the hemisphere,
And pass'd beneath the horizon sometimes too,&mdash;
I loved the sight &mdash; a lightning sheet would gild
The pale front of the evening sky, and come
With bright reiteration suddenly.&mdash;
Sometimes the watery pillar, huge and vast,
Touching the clouds, and walking on the sea,
Approach'd us like a giant, to enwrap
Our vessel, and o'erwhelm us &mdash; till the ball
Sent from the cannon's throat did pierce its side,
And the whole mass, a deluge, thundering fell.
Any thing &mdash; any thing that broke the calm,
And caused a moment's thought, was dear to me,
For my heart's load it lighten'd.  Day by day,
I strove to comfort me, &mdash; I strove to dash
The mantle of despondency, that wrapt
My thoughts in gloom, aside; yet, even then,
I sometimes deem'd, that I should find thee well,
And happy; and that thus my heavy fears,
Like clouds, would melt in that clear heaven of joy;
That would o'erarch my soul at meeting thee!

Oh!  who shall tell my bosom's agony,&mdash;
Words cannot paint it &mdash; language is in vain&mdash;
The misery, that like the fiery bolt,
Did fall; and, with an overwhelming sweep,
Pass'd through, and sear'd my unresisting heart!
When, scarcely had our keen prow touched the strand,
Then to my fond inquiry, &mdash; Oh, dread fate!&mdash;
I heard that thou wert in the land of rest!!
Stunn'd to the soul, &mdash; and stupified, &mdash; and drugg'd
To misery, and to loathing, with this draught
From grief's most bitter chalice, for a while,
Beyond the sway of reason I did lie;
And said not &mdash; heard not &mdash; heeded not; the sun
Shone not for me; the summer of my life
Was wasted &mdash; wither'd, as by magic spell,
Into the leafless bough, and frosty wind!

As stills the tempest of a winter day
Into a sombre shade, a gloomy calm,
So hath the hurricane, that rent my heart,
Wasted its force, yet only left behind
Ruins, and all the silence of despair;
And I have come, this once, before I leave
This land for ever, thus to throw me down
Upon thy grave, &mdash; this green and silent grave,
Lose for an hour the manhood of my soul,
And weep in solitude and bitterness.

&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;

Lo!  'tis the crimson sun, whose western rays
Burn on the wall:  I must away &mdash; away.
Farewell!  already are our sails unfurl'd,
And, flapping, woo the breeze to bear us on:
Farewell!  oh dim, and silent field of graves!
My native land, farewell! &mdash; now to the sea;
And then a wild and desolate abode,
In lands unknown, &mdash; upon some woody isle,
Upon the other side of this round world!
