The winds are pillowed on the waveless deep,
And from the curtain'd sky the midnight moon
Looks sombred o'er the forests great, that sleep
Unstirring, while a soft melodious tune,
Nature's still voice, the lapsing stream, is heard,
And ever and anon th' unseen night-wandering bird.

An Arab of the air, it floats along,
Enamour'd of the silence and the night,
The tall pine tops, the mountains dim among,
Aye wheeling on in solitary flight;
Like an ungentle spirit earthwards sent,
To haunt the pale-faced moon, a cheerless banishment.

A wild low sound &mdash; a melancholy cry,
Now near, remoter now, and more remote;
In the blue dusk, unseen, it journeys by,
Loving amid the starlight calm to float;
Now sharp and shrill, now faint, and by degrees
Fainter, like Summer winds that die 'mid leafy trees.

I listen &mdash; in the solitude I stand,
The breathless hush of midnight &mdash; all is still;
Unmoved the valleys spread, the woods expand;
There is a slumbering mist upon the hill;
Nature through all her regions seems asleep,
Save, ever and anon, that wailing sound and deep.

Doubtless, in elder times, unhallow'd sound!
When Fancy ruled the subject lands, and Fear,
Some demon elf; or goblin shrieking round,
Darkly thou smot'st on Superstition's ear;
The wild wood had its spirits, and the glen
Teem'd with dim shapes, and shades inimical to men

Here, in this solitude all vast and void,
Life seems a vision of the shadowy past,
By mighty Silence swallow'd and destroy'd,
And thou of living sounds the dirge, and last;
Serenely quiet sleeps the moveless scene,
As if, all discord o'er, mankind had never been.

Nocturnal haunter of the homeless sky!
Most immaterial of terrestrial things!
On the grey cloud in slumber canst thou lie;
Or 'mid the flooding moonlight fold thy wings?
'Mid shooting star-beams lovest thou to roam?
This gross earth, sure, for thee is scarce a fitting home.

Lovest thou, when storms are dark, and rains come down,
When wild winds round lone dwellings moan and sigh,
And night is hooded in its gloomiest frown,
To mingle with the tempest thy lone cry,
To pierce the rolling thunder-clouds, and brook
The scythe-wing'd lightning's glare with fierce unshrinking look?

On Summer's scented eve, when fulgent skies
The last bright traces of the day partook,
And Heaven Iook'd down on Earth with starry eyes,
Reflected softly in the wimpling brook,
Far, far above, wild solitary bird,
Thy melancholy scream 'mid woodlands I have heard.

And I have heard thee when the wintry snow
Mantled with chilling white the moonless vales,
Through the drear darkness wandering to and fro,
And mingling with the sharp and sighing gales
Thy wizard note &mdash; when Nature's prostrate form,
In desolation sad, lay sunk beneath the storm.

It is a sound most solemn, strange, and lone,
That wildly talks of something far remote
Amid the past &mdash; of something scarcely known&mdash;
Of Time's most early voice a parted note&mdash;
The echo of Antiquity, &mdash; the cry
Of Ruin brooding o'er some Greatness doom'd to die.

So parted from communion with mankind,
So severed from all life and living sound,
Calmly the solemnized and soften'd mind
Sinks down, and dwells in pensive thought profound,
On dreams of yore, on visions swept away,
The loves and friendships warm of being's early day.

Most lonely voice!  most wild unbodied scream!
That hauntest thus the silent wilderness,
Thou tellest man that life is but a dream,
Romantic as the tones of thy distress,
Leaving on earth no lingering tract behind,
And melting as thou meltest on the wind!

Faint come the notes &mdash; thou meltest distant far,
Scarce heard at intervals upon the night,
Leaving to loneliness each listening star,
The trees &mdash; the river &mdash; and the moonshine bright,
And 'mid this stirless hush, this still of death,
Heard is my bosom's throb, and audible my breath.

Lo!  'mid the Future dim, remote or near,
Lurks in the womb of Time a dreadful day,
When shuddering Earth an awful Voice shall hear,
And Ruin make the universe her prey,
And Silence, when the pulse of Nature stills,
In viewless robe shall sit enthroned on smoking hills!
