Scenes of all hues, and life in every form,
The dark, the bright, the frozen, and the warm&mdash;
Urburgh, within thy ample space were seen&mdash;
Revel and want &mdash; and but a wall between!
Here wild profusion &mdash; naked famine there&mdash;
Here care unknown &mdash; there nothing left but care!
Behind where some proud mansion rear'd its head&mdash;
Cold winds pierc'd poverty's unfurnish'd shed:
Close by some glitt'ring dome, where all was bright,
Lay sorrow shrouded in unbroken night:
The very stones where want dropt down to die,
Shook with the equipage that rattled by;
Whose passing torches' ostentatious glare
Flash'd on the houseless victim of despair!
Here burst the long-loud laugh &mdash; there heav'd the groan&mdash;
Circl'd by anguish &mdash; pleasure flx'd her throne!
Show'ring on those who throng'd her golden seat,
For each enraptur'd sense, allurements sweet&mdash;
Shedding abundant on the crowded board
The best that art could yield, or earth afford;
And mingling with the wealth of every clime,
Whate'er amusement could give wings to time&mdash;
The play; the masquerade at midnight hour;
The concert, fraught with soul inspiring power;
The witching dance that bids an evening fly,
Swift as the convict's who is soon to die:
Where beauty trod with sylph-like step its maze;
And seem'd to grow still lovelier to the gaze:
The scenes where luxury and wealth combin'd
To banish sorrow, and enchant the mind:
Where sparkling chandeliers, with starry light,
Shone out triumphant o'er the reign of night;
While art and nature seem'd in contest there,
To deck the noble, and adorn the fair!
The crimson ruby, and the sapphire blue,
Glitter'd with every motion on the view:
The sunny diamond sparkled on the sight,
And flash'd its dazzling tints upon the night.
There man assumed his fair, but specious form,
Frigid, tho' bright, as ice-drops in the storm;
With elegance of manners, wit, and ease,
Devoting life in learning but to please
With smiling magic winding round the heart;
Blinding the thoughtless to the veil of art;
Whose soul, with more than iron mask conceal'd,
One real thought or feeling scarce reveal'd.
Young beauty there, (whose loveliest tint is still
The blush that neither comes nor goes at will,
But passes like the crimson cloud at eve,
That seems on earth a softer bloom to leave&mdash;)
Met the full gaze of crowds in conscious pride,
Nor shrank within herself, nor turn'd aside;
But knew the bold, repelling glance, to throw
On those she did not court, or would not know!
Cold, empty Fashion!  heartless is thy form!
No love can thrill it, and no friendship warm:
Each genuine feeling of the soul by thee
Is check'd, or withers in thy lethargy;
Wavering as meteors in the northern sky,
No useful beam thou shed'st on heart nor eye;
To scenes that might the feeling soul inspire
Thy vacant look denies one spark of fire:
Oft' have I seen thee, when the Tragic Muse
Essay'd her melting influence to diffuse;
Gaze on the anguish'd, or terrific scene,
With tranquil eye, and cold, unalter'd mien;
While other cheeks were glistening with the tear,
And other breasts were harrow'd up with fear:
Sense, genius, passion, weigh'd against thy power,
Nor rouse the mind, nor rule one tender hour.
Ah!  happier far, the scene of friends belov'd!
Congenial souls, long known, and often prov'd:
Where the full tide of feeling pours its stream,
And the heart gladdens in the eyes' bright beam;
Where all the treasur'd stores of mind are brought
T' enrich the feast of fancy and of thought&mdash;
Where tho' wit strike, mirth draws its barb away;
And heart-born smiles on sunny features play.
In such a scene how swift the moments sped!
The night was ended ere the charm had fled!
So while we gaze eve's gorgeous clouds to mark,
Ere we can trace their forms the heavens are dark:
Too soon dispersed, like those we lov'd to greet,
Till desolation circles round our feet;
And silent darkness fills the place which they
Peopled and brighten'd in life's younger day.
With them we snatch the golden hours of life&mdash;
The rest are passion, storm, disgust, or strife:
Then only shine the rays that burst between
The clouds of fate, to cheer life's checquer'd scene&mdash;
Save to the few, whose souls of wilder mood,
Find rapture in the depths of solitude;
Companion'd by each vast and thrilling thought,
And beings in the womb of fancy wrought;
Whose minds create what earth nor heaven has known,
Who scarce remember that they breathe alone.

In yon raz'd College, youth shall learn no more;
Nor doctors dully doze o'er classic lore;
Nor history her mould'ring page unroll;
Nor science raise on high th' expanding soul:
Nor gifted boys, to emulation fired,
Pant to be heard, and envied, and admired!
There every study that could lift the thought,
Before the deep and ardent mind was brought.
That proudly started from its brighter birth;
And soar'd on high, and spurn'd the bounds of earth;
And mark'd, in the unmeasured realms of light,
The planet's circle, and the comet's flight;
Traced suns on suns, that, 'midst the starry spheres,
Bestow'd on countless worlds their days and years.
While nature's mystic laws, unknown before,
Their powers reveal'd, and work'd unknown no more.
The mind its faculties distinguish'd, trac'd;
In judgment strengthen'd, and refin'd in taste.
There the young Poet burn'd the prize to win&mdash;
Bade ardent fancy's soaring flight begin;
And fann'd the spark of that etherial fire,
That beam'd a Sun for nations to admire.
But there no more the tutor'd soul shall rise,
Panting to mingle with her native skies.
Within those walls the monumental bust
Rescued the form that time had strew'd in dust;
Where, chisell'd on the long enduring stone,
The features of departed genius shone&mdash;
Reft &mdash; crush'd by havoc's desolating sweep&mdash;
Now scarce a marble marks the great who sleep;
And all that fate has left the living &mdash; is to weep!

No more beside the hero's trophied urn,
The fearless soldier feels his bosom burn;
Reviews the past in admiration dumb&mdash;
Or fondly pictures triumphs yet to come!
Nor near the Poet's tomb the friend of art
Feels inspiration kindling at his heart!
But ah!  how many of that fated race
Have left their bones where nothing marks the place;
Save the wild-flower that blooms above their head,
And drops the only tear that's o'er them shed.
Often, like meteors shooting thro' the night,
They lighten on the world &mdash; and sink from sight!
Too oft', like spirits of another sphere,
Wand'ring, they find no kindred beings here&mdash;
Strangers amidst the crowd they battle through&mdash;
Absorbed in fancy's intellectual view&mdash;
Scorning and scorn'd by traffic's sordid crew;
They breathe &mdash; they move &mdash; as if they liv'd alone;
Or in a wild creation of their own!
Scarce of the earth that bears their alien tread;
They live in storms, and tempests wrap their head
With thoughts, and hopes, and feelings, none can share&mdash;
They start away and perish in despair.

Here oft' I gazed, while, slowly passing by,
The long procession proudly caught the eye;
In military pomp, or civic pride,
And lin'd with armed hosts on either side;
Whether it grac'd some warrior's funeral hour,
Or led the monarch in his pride of power;
With statesmen, heroes, princes in the train
And graced with all wealth, valor, could obtain!
Such myriads throng'd, as if the nation there,
Came with one mind the grief or joy to share.
If chance some victory had plum'd the land,
Exulting thousands pour'd along the strand;
And while the cannon roll'd the news around,
Each seem'd to triumph in the welcome sound.
The joyous lamps dispell'd the shades of night;
Arranged like stars, with every colour bright;
Or Iris' bow revers'd in many-tinted light:
Aloft, transparent, painted trophies hung,
And with the conqueror's name the city rung!
All left their homes the midnight joy to share!
And with proud acclamations rent the air.
Alas!  they thought not then how dearly bought
Those triumphs, and how soon to turn to nought:
They did not deem that fame, so vainly won,
Would leave their country beggar'd and undone.
Alas!  the pomp no more shall traverse here!
And victory's last shout hath left the ear!
O'er all, a silent melancholy reigns,
That spreads (contagious) to the neighbouring plains.

Alone I pace thro' traffic's busiest seat,
Where thousands lately throng'd the noisy street;
Where beauty loiter'd many a vacant morn,
Seeking whatever might her charms adorn;
Convinced that dress imparts a higher grace
To each perfection of the form and face.
And men (tho' few) more frivolous than they,
Here traced the changing fashions of the day;
Whose dearth of mind, or idleness of thought&mdash;
'Twas all they could &mdash; that poor distinction sought!
To glitter like the gaudy butterfly&mdash;
To live &mdash; be seen &mdash; to flutter &mdash; and to die!
Here form'd for pride, or luxury, or use,
Was found whate'er art, nature, could produce:
Now the bright mantle caught th' admiring gaze&mdash;
Now gold and jewels shed their mingled rays:
And all the lures of trade, and powers of art,
Seem'd centred in one great capacious mart.
The few, by learning led, by genius fired,
To nobler fame, and loftier thoughts, aspired:
Rapt in philosophy's sublimest height,
Or in the Poets' wild etherial flight,
Eager each maze of science to explore,
Ambitious to increase their mental store&mdash;
They, 'midst the letter'd treasures, lov'd to seek
The volumes where the great departed speak;
Or living writers vied with Roman and with Greek.
And here the glass, defying space, was made,
To show the heavens in all their pride display'd;
Whose lengthen'd vision brings the planet nigh,
That shoots no ray to man's unaided eye,
Lost with its moons amidst the boundless sky&mdash;
Nor less amazing, that which brings to light
Myriads of forms, impalpable to sight;
But which, beneath the optic power, appear
An almost hidden world of beings here;
Active with life as those that tread the plain&mdash;
Perchance as sensible of joy or pain!
Perfect in parts, a countless, varied race;
With scarce a portion of the realm of space!
Thus shown, the insect we might crush unseen,
A bulk gigantic wears, and monster's mien!
And here th' electric tube reveal'd to sight
The mystic fluid of supernal might:
Whose dread explosion rends the echoing air,
As if unearthly beings battled there;
While midnight lightning frights the timid soul;
And lengthen'd peals of thunder shake the pole!
The painted globe display'd its varied book,
For man to look on, as a God might look&mdash;
Who sees the earth an atom whirling round&mdash;
A speck amidst the infinite profound!
Yet, on its narrow space, what passions burn,
Blight its fair face, and man to demon turn.
Upon some plain he casts his craving eye&mdash;
There slays his kind &mdash; and then lies down to die!
Whate'er could vigour to his mind impart,
Or prove the depth of thought, the powers of art;
All that could splendour on his days bestow&mdash;
Here perfect shone &mdash; the noon of life below.

Scarce can I trace where once the Tavern stood,
Where men of learning met in cheerful mood;
Where oft', when twilight robed the west in gray,
They came to close in joy a studious day:
Then various questions bred debates profound,
Broken as wine or wit by turns went round!
There Philo boasted how he knew the men
Who ruled the realm &mdash; what they design'd, and when&mdash;
What letter last he penn'd to save the state&mdash;
What satire levell'd at the guilty great!
The Poet there reveal'd his patron's name,
His fancied guide to fortune and to fame!
To doubtful friends his sanguine hopes display'd;
And had been happy &mdash; had his debts been paid.
The Critic told &mdash; as much as critics do&mdash;
What pages then were passing in review:
What wings were clipt, to check the further fright
Of some young bard, who aim'd to reach the height
Parnassus tempting shows &mdash; what work struck dead,
Left harmless curses on his nameless head.
The Doctor there forgot his numerous slain,
Laugh'd o'er the glass, and "was himself again"!
And men of letters show'd some rare unique,
Purchas'd, perchance, where none such gem would seek.
Lov'd scene of converse!  seat of mental glee!
Now lost for ever both to them and me!
Where such a circle can I hope to find?
Such letter'd friendship, or such feast of mind?
Each intellectual joy has taken flight,
And learning finds another Gothic night:
Refinement backward treads her steps again,
And man has toil'd a thousand years in vain!
So when an earthquake shakes a polish'd realm,
And the ground opens, cities, plains, to whelm;
A wild and barren desert meets the day;
Whence all the pride of art has sunk away.

Near where yon obelisk its point displays,
A Market echo'd on accustom'd days;
Whose numerous lights, upon the evening air,
Shed far around a red and wavering glare:
Where, jostling through the crowd, and viewing all,
The laborer urg'd his way from stall to stall.
There did the sun-burnt gardener weekly bring
The fruits of autumn, or the flowers of spring;
And many a farmer thither brought his store,
Who having sold it, car'd for nothing more.
There half the neighbouring fields their treasures pour'd;
And plenty seem'd to spread the general board;
Earth, ocean, air, their various tribes supplied&mdash;
For man's repast, fish, fowl, and flock had died!
Who there might gaze, would never dream of dearth;
It seem'd the very magazine of earth!
While rattling bustle and tumultuous noise,
Echoed from wheels and horses, men and boys;
Superior far, though grating to the ear,
Than the dead silence now prevailing here.

Fall'n &mdash; desert City!  splendid was thy state!
Ages had o'er thee roll'd to make thee great!
Tempest and toil thy people struggled through,
To see thee rise in grandeur to the view!
How slowly did thy temple pierce the day!
How gradually thy streets their length display:
Year after year beheld them stretch along;
And peopled by a still increasing throng&mdash;
With ceaseless step they pierc'd the fields around,
Till mansions prest the lately cultur'd ground;
And roof and steeple glitter'd in the sky,
Where recent woods had waved their boughs on high!
Nought stopt thy progress!  forest &mdash; river &mdash; hill&mdash;
Beheld thee pass their feeble barriers still&mdash;
O'er leafless leagues one mass of buildings spread;
Till every trace of rural life had fled!
Till e'en the villages that round thee bloom'd,
At last within thy giant grasp were tomb'd.
It seem'd as if mankind had gather'd there,
One general fate of good or ill to share:
The foot that tried to trace thy ample round,
Wearied ere half thy devious course was found.
The wond'ring traveller hail'd thy noontide fame;
And the whole world resounded with thy name.
But ah!  how quickly in destruction strew'd,
When fled thy people, scatter'd and subdued!
Thus the slow oak expands in pride below&mdash;
But struck by lightning, withers at a blow!
As scenes of past prosperity appear,
Who now could view thee and refuse the tear?
'Midst the drear shadows of this wreck I trace
The banish'd pleasures of each well known place&mdash;
Till darker grow the ruins on mine eye,
And grief compels the unavailing sigh.

Pass we this gate, beneath the colonnade;
The pillars in the square within display'd,
Enclose the area of the late Exchange;
Where captains, merchants, mingled to arrange
The world's vast trade, as though all nations there,
Came its enriching intercourse to share.
Men from all climes, as if by one consent,
Met in one throng, inspir'd by one intent;
From Europe's nearest and remotest shore&mdash;
And Western Islands where tornadoes roar&mdash;
From Asia's groves, once man's fair seat of prime;
And Afric, hindmost in the march of time&mdash;
From wide Columbia, bursting into power,
Where freedom fled in her despairing hour;
When, of each famed and cherish'd spot bereft,
She sought the sole asylum fate had left;
Till renovating time should call her back,
To bless once more each early favor'd track.
Of all the world this spot might seem the heart;
That urged the vital stream to every part:
Whence each to others sent what each could spare,
Till nature's bounty all contrived to share!
The rich abundance of the fruitful field&mdash;
What surplus stores the hand of toil could yield&mdash;
Here found a ready mart, a transfer sure,
To bless the wealthy, and enrich the poor.
Here rival nations, spite of hate or pride,
Seem'd in one social brotherhood allied;
As if war, interest, ne'er had spread a cloud,
The sunshine of so fair a scene to shroud.

And near that busy spot the Bank arose;
The nation's pride &mdash; the envy of her foes!
Whence, as from some exhaustless mine of gold,
The stream of wealth o'er all the country roll'd;
And distant realms, and hostile too, had share
In riches' magic influence reigning there:
As there had work'd some deep pervading spell,
That drew from every clime its stores to swell;
And bade all earth in confidence repose
On honor that was sacred e'en to foes.
And thence the vital stream return'd to all,
Like welcome showers on burning fields that fall;
Or some unfailing spring that bursts to light,
And onward rolls increasing to the sight:
Till o'er the land the fruitful river pours,
And loads with riches its exulting shores;
Then mingles with the sea, and spreads around,
Wherever ocean rolls, or man is found.
What joyous crowds each day collected there,
The produce of their treasur'd hoards to share!
How many thousands drew from thence th' increase
That blest their days with ease, their nights with peace!
The spring of commerce, and the heart of trade,
It bade its influence all the land pervade:
And if the sudden cry of war arose&mdash;
It arm'd the hosts that flew to meet their foes;
And launch'd the fleets that swept the vanquish'd main,
The nation's glory foremost to maintain!
The bulwark of the land &mdash; the soul of all&mdash;
Its honour stood unquestion'd in its fall!
And when it fell, in hostile ruin hurl'd&mdash;
It seem'd as if an earthquake shook the world!
And distant cities started from their sleep;
And nations woke to hear the tale and weep;
And lamentations rose from every shore,
That one so rich &mdash; so mighty &mdash; was no more!

Ill-fated land!  to ruin doom'd a prey!
Where wars perpetual sweep mankind away!
Or whence the riches of the nation fly,
That distant lands may mourn, and armies die.
In vain thy fields with rip'ning treasures bloom&mdash;
Amidst their wealth want oft' but finds a tomb!
In vain thy merchants and thy peasants toil,
While war exhausts thee, or while armies spoil!
False is the smile that decks thy laborer's cheek&mdash;
And ill conceals the dread he fears to speak!
And still the mask of safety covers all&mdash;
Nor drops &mdash; but at the nation's final fall.
Even when subjugation hovers nigh,
The gilded surface cheats the patriot eye:
And though each ruler knows his country's state&mdash;
And every peasant trembles for her fate&mdash;
Still will th' infatuate statesmen of the land,
Provoke the vengeance of a hostile hand;
Or goad her, till impatient of the chain,
She rise to burst the galling links in twain.
In such a realm &mdash; O!  what must man endure!
No joy is certain, and no life secure.

From such a land &mdash; the seat of strife and woe;
In search of happier climes, the people go.
But much, and long &mdash; (though scarce in hope,) they bear;
Ere from their father's graves their steps they tear&mdash;
Ere from the seat of youth's past joys they fly,
Upon some foreign, friendless shore, to die!
A thousand strong attachments rise around,
To chain their footsteps to that hallow'd ground:
Still dear to sight their childhood scenes appear;
And in the parting moment-doubly dear!
The barren heath that infant footsteps prest,
May breathe enchantment round the manly breast:
The stream where boyhood plunged his limbs to lave,
In age's eye seems an unalter'd wave&mdash;
The trees &mdash; the rocks &mdash; that rise in native air;
This mystic &mdash; nameless sense &mdash; appear to share!
The links of friendship &mdash; kindred's heartstring ties&mdash;
That bind the spirit to its native skies&mdash;
And all these feelings tongue can scarce define,
Home's magic charms around the soul entwine&mdash;
These may be felt, but scarcely can be told;
Nor oft are sever'd till the breast is cold.
Yet fate, despite of all these bonds, may tear
The soul away; wrongs, sorrows, none can bear,
May urge the man some kinder spot to find,
Who leaves his fondest feelings still behind.
But oh!  what wrongs, what sorrows must they be,
To launch him thus on fortune's treacherous sea;
When habits, flx'd like instinct in the soul,
Have power each thought and feeling to controul&mdash;
Commencing life anew, when cares should cease;
And, labor rest upon the lap of peace;
Where scarce a hope can rise, ere life must close,
To see the dawn of pleasure, or repose.
They whose misrule compels such hearts to roam,
Should live to feel how keen the loss of home;
To sigh their last beneath some distant skies,
And sink, without a friend to close their eyes.
Yes!  spite of all these spells of soul, they flee&mdash;
'Tis their sole hope &mdash; some land more just to see!
Where peace may still her calm assurance spread,
And equal laws their guarding influence shed:
Where night in safe repose may steal away,
Contentment bless, and hope illume the day:
Where dying they may trust their sons will see
Life growing &mdash; bright'ning in prosperity;
And where at least the fruits of toil will yield
Their boon to him who cultivates the field.
The merchant takes his wealth to climes like these,
There to ensure tranquillity and ease;
The swain seeks ground secure from hostile tread,
Content to find some peace-protected shed;
Blest that his toil may not be spent in vain
For hearts that spurn him &mdash; hands that forge his chain.
Urg'd by distress, the sons of art retire,
Where hope may cheer them, and success inspire;
They quit a land with pomp, not freedom, graced;
A noble desert, and a splendid waste!
Far &mdash; far they urge their distant course away,
Through wat'ry wastes to realms of brighter day:
A rising nation hails them to her shore,
And bids the welcome wand'rers fear no more!
Such emigrations feed a new-born state,
But urge the realm they quit to swifter fate;
The heart's best blood forsakes the fated land;
Its absent treasures aid that rival's hand:
Th' unlessen'd burthens those they leave must bear,
Until taxation battles with despair!
The handicraftsmen there their arts pursue,
And prove a source of power, and riches too.
Thus rolls the ceaseless change from shore to shore&mdash;
Thus nations rise &mdash; thus fall to rise no more!
The seat of empire moves from clime to clime,
Nor e'er prevails against the power of time.
So here the ocean gains upon the land&mdash;
And there, receding, leaves a blooming strand;
Till over spire and turret rolls the wave,
Or cities rise upon the coral cave!
Urburgh o'er every realm her flag unfurl'd;
Herself an island &mdash; yet she awed the world!
When she arose, and bared her mighty arm
For battle &mdash; nations trembled with alarm&mdash;
Her look was lightning &mdash; and a thunder peal
Her threat; that made the hostile shores to reel.
Her giant grasp embraced from pole to pole;
And east and west own'd her supreme controul:
Men of all tongues, all climes, confess'd her reign,
Queen of the isles, and mistress of the main.
But, like a brilliant star that bursts to sight,
Her empire spread in wreck, and sank in night.
Yet still &mdash; her name &mdash; her glory, ne'er can die,
While earth shall track her orbit through the sky.
'Tis true, the greatest states decline and fall;
But to their rulers we impute it all.
Look back!  and trace, in the historic scene,
What Carthage, Rome, and more as proud have been&mdash;
Then say what strew'd their honors in the dust,
But wasting wars, and governments unjust!
It is not that th' exhausted earth denies
The seed to ripen &mdash; 'tis not that the skies
Refuse to bless her with the timely shower;
Nor is it that the sun withholds his power&mdash;
The ground is fertile still; the seasons roll;
And summer, winter, pass o'er either pole:
The morn yet rises on his golden wing,
And evening falls her balmy dews to fling&mdash;
Still nature pours her wealth o'er hill and plain;
'Tis man alone that makes her bloom in vain.

Yes &mdash; life has evils!  earth is charged with woe!
Unclouded fortune ne'er was found below!
Here warring passions strew the wreck of strife&mdash;
There nature rends with pain the strings of life!
The flowery prospects of the youthful eye
A darken'd scene in manhood's vigour die;
And manhood's hopes &mdash; since hope can scarce be lost&mdash;
Set in the lasting chill of age's frost!
Oft' by Volcanoes realms in wreck are hurl'd:
A sacrifice, perchance, to save a world&mdash;
Yet Nature's general laws are more than kind;
Man is the greatest foe that man can find.
If Nature rend the earth &mdash; she heals the wound!
To hide the ruin &mdash; spreads profusion round!
Man leaves the victim who has met his blow,
Till the last drop, unstaunch'd, unwept, shall flow!
Whether she smite with fire, or flood, or air,
Nature but seldom leaves complete despair;
But the dark ruin of despotic sway
Blasts earth and man, and sweeps his hopes away.
Eats, like the Mole, the germ of future wealth;
And poisons all the springs of life and health:
Steals the sole joy the sinking poor have left;
Whose last is gone when liberty is reft.
Thou, Urburgh!  of this curse hadst more than share&mdash;
A century saw thee verging to despair!
Slowly but sure the secret poison work'd&mdash;
Deep in thy heart its deadly influence lurk'd&mdash;
Long years of wasteful war thy vitals wore;
And pour'd thy gold on many a hostile shore;
Till burthens destin'd for a race unborn,
Made thee of earth the beacon and the scorn.
Thou who unharm'd &mdash; untouch'd &mdash; might'st still have stood&mdash;
To aid the cause of despots shed thy blood!
Who having triumph'd, leagu'd to bind in chains
The cheated world, and robb'd thee for thy pains.
Thy rulers, selfish, cruel, and unjust,
Devour'd thy wealth, and strew'd thy rights in dust:
Too often ranged against the public weal,
With scarcely souls to judge, or hearts to feel;
Clinging to power, despite of public hate;
Urging with desperate acts the nation's fate&mdash;
Blind to the mental progress of mankind;
Themselves the hindmost in the march of mind;
In them nor art nor science found a friend,
One cheering smile, one aiding hand to lend;
In their despite improvements spread along,
Till mightiest spirits started from the throng;
And bay'd them to their teeth, and dar'd their power;
And shook the throne itself in that wild hour!
Once, from all climes, men flew to thee for aid&mdash;
Then thy rich left thee, lonely and betray'd!
Thy noblest spirits sought some happier realm,
Ere all their hopes thy hast'ning fate should whelm;
Or too indignant to endure the chain,
They saw thee, heaving, pant to burst in vain.
Each class sank slowly in the social scale;
Th' industrious found their toil of no avail;
And famine, stealing to the laborer's cot,
Breathed life's last curse on his unhappy lot.
When want in threat'ning murmurs found a vent&mdash;
Then &mdash; did the tyrants tremble and relent?
No!  despots for themselves alone can feel&mdash;
They heard the prayer &mdash; they answer'd with the steel!
They first embrued the sword in native blood
That pour'd in after times a hideous flood:
That sword, they deem'd, would still a nation's cries
And silence wrongs that thunder'd to the skies.
Weak &mdash; shallow hope!  when men have reach'd the worst,
Their wrath explodes in one volcanic burst!
'Tis not for him to fear the chance of strife,
Who finds no blessing left to sweeten life&mdash;
Assured no change &mdash; whatever change may be&mdash;
Can see him deeper sunk in misery.
And who, with mortal feelings, fails to chuse
The chance to win, with nothing left to lose?
On whom, should death alight, it does but shed
The long repose that stills the aching head.
'Twas then, when civil strife the land assail'd,
The watchful foe attack'd her and prevail'd:
'Twas then the ruin, such as now I see,
Fell on my hapless country, and on me.

Yes!  I remember well that fatal day
When noble Urburgh fell, the despots' prey:
The previous night, when hostile armies closed
Around her barriers, not an eye reposed;
Thousands were listening to the distant drum,
To judge how nigh the gathering foe was come:
The cannons' bursting sound, that cleav'd the air,
Was follow'd by the blankness of despair!
At intervals some shooting rocket rose,
A signal to direct the march of foes.
The mansions pour'd their inmates on the street,
Where mingling strangers seem'd like friends to meet;
At every turn some crowd consulting stood,
Dreading the coming morn would rise in blood.
And there was hurrying, rushing to and fro
Of man and horse &mdash; a people whelm'd in woe!
And men were shouting for their friends; and cries
Of women trembled in the echoing skies!
The high &mdash; the low &mdash; were blended in one throng,
That like a stormy river roll'd along;
All ranks abroad, as by one impulse, flock'd,
Leaving their dwellings darken'd and unlock'd;
Save where a light through some lone casement beam'd,
That like a meteor o'er the tempest gleam'd;
Whose inmates hurried through the sleepless night
The preparation for the morrow's flight.
The time had been &mdash; and here &mdash; when such an hour
Had found those thousands sunk in slumber's power&mdash;
Breathing unconscious life, or dreaming bliss&mdash;
But sleep could never reign o'er scene like this;
Where shouts and curses &mdash; terror and despair&mdash;
Roll'd all their mingled sounds along the air.
Once he who through the streets, at midnight, past,
Might deem himself of all mankind the last;
So peaceful, solitary, still and dead&mdash;
As all who throng'd them yesterday were fled&mdash;
Now &mdash; 'twas but like a day bereft of light;
A sunless noon of tempest and affright!

Thousands departed ere the morning rose,
That saw the City traversed by her foes:
'Twas the last day that shone upon her fame&mdash;
The evening left her nothing but a name&mdash;
That now resounds a warning word to all,
Of the sure causes of a nation's fall.
Who lived of her enslavers, fled the first&mdash;
The hopeless &mdash; reckless &mdash; stay'd to brave the worst!
In sullen hate upon the foe they gazed;
And cursed the hostile flag that triumph raised;
Borne by the very hands that oft' before
Had lost the trophies Urburgh proudly wore.
In endless columns they advanc'd along,
Safe in her weakness, and in numbers strong;
Like the fierce torrent that the mountain pours,
Tearing the ravaged vales through which it roars.
The heavy tread of many thousand feet,
Shaking the ground, past on from street to street;
The tramp of steed follow'd the rumbling gun,
And noon was glowing ere their march was done&mdash;
The drums that peal'd their thunder on the air,
Roll'd the last echoes of a land's despair;
And the shrill trumpet's loud and piercing breath,
Burst on the fallen like the blast of death!
Yes &mdash; there were bitter feelings none could speak&mdash;
And proud men look'd the wrath they could not wreak&mdash;
And they whose hopes had with their country's grown
Long'd for a look might turn that host to stone!
The pride of manhood struggled with despair;
And hands were clench'd as if a sword were there;
And the last feeling of the soul was shame,
That thus should set their country's star of fame.

Collected in one Square, a patriot band,
Held life's last struggle for their native land;
Who rather than behold her final woe,
Would fight to save, or fall amidst the foe.
How fierce &mdash; how fatal &mdash; in that spot, the strife!
None would surrender &mdash; though the boon was life!
From every street that form'd an entrance there,
The foe advanced to wedge them in despair:
From every opening rending thunders pour'd,
That, echoing round, in long loud vollies roar'd:
Through living lines of men the bolts were hurl'd,
Which, as they heard them, dash'd them from the world.
That post they held ev'n while they shed their blood
Slaughter'd and crush'd in masses as they stood:
The dead and mangled that around them lay,
A rampart seem'd to keep the foe at bay;
Where muskets rested on some friend's cold form,
Prolong'd the fierce, but unavailing storm.
The iron shower in fatal fury flew&mdash;
The strife of wrath more wild and deadly grew;
As the long rumbling tempest pours at last
Its deepest rage in one collected blast!
Oft' fell some shatter'd building's loosen'd wall,
That whelm'd the dead and living in its fall&mdash;
Oft' the foe rush'd into the charnel square&mdash;
As oft' retiring, left their bravest there!
Still the last wreck of that determin'd band
Braced every nerve to perish hand to hand!
Then close they came, and vengeance had her fill,
And life's last energies were rous'd to kill:
And the hot breath was felt, (so near they drew&mdash;)
As if the purple blast of poison blew.
There scarce was room to whirl the sword around,
That rose to cleave its victim to the ground:
While grappling, even in the pangs of death,
They look'd the curse that fell with life's last breath.
From house to house they fought &mdash; from room to room,
And in those lordly mansions met their doom:
Doors shatter'd &mdash; stain'd with blood &mdash; remain'd to tell
The tale of those who bravely fought and fell:
And heroes dropp'd, life's crimson stream to pour
Upon the richly decorated floor;
And shouts and tumults in those chambers rung,
Where night her veil o'er silent couches flung:
Where once the concert pour'd its witching strain,
Echoed the clash of swords, the groans of pain!
Floors, where the joyous dance its mazes spread,
Shook with the struggling warriors' heavy tread:
Where elegance in golden luxury dwelt&mdash;
Where every bliss of polish'd life was felt&mdash;
The rage of slaughter breathed &mdash; the blows of death were dealt!
So oft' some sweetly smiling, favor'd scene,
Adorn'd with flowers, and ever cloth'd in green;
Where ages past had smoothly roll'd away;
Nor brought one freezing, burning, stormy day&mdash;
Beholds at last a sudden tempest driven,
Gather'd and borne upon the winds of heaven;
That bursts with desolating force around,
And strews with wreck the lately smiling ground.

The day's last streak of light dissolved away;
The strife was done &mdash; for none were left to slay!
Of all that desperate, devoted band,
Not one remain'd to move a hostile hand.
Their patriot fire was quench'd &mdash; their duty o'er&mdash;
The spark extinct that nothing can restore!
And they were stretch'd upon the silent bier;
The last &mdash; sole resting place, that waits us here.
Though late so anxious &mdash; then it wrung them not
Though war their nation from the earth should blot&mdash;
They died attempting to maintain her blest,
Nor foe nor tyrant more could mar their rest.
Their grave &mdash; that ground on which their faith they prov'd,
Was still their portion in the land they lov'd.

But how felt they &mdash; whose lot had there been cast
In peace and hope &mdash; now hope was almost past!
Who saw in horror, stupor, or despair,
The storm of war let loose in fury there!
There &mdash; where their mornings broke in tranquil light;
And fear ne'er stole upon the stilly night:
Who view'd their homes, the prey of lawless bands;
Their mansions kindled by enfuriate hands,
Their own and children's heritage, destroy'd;
Their native scenes a wreck'd and blacken'd void!
That night &mdash; who saw it, and has being yet,
Its blasting horrors never can forget!
The plund'ring foe swept the vast city round,
And made a spoil of all the wealth they found:
And many a cry, from victims in their power,
Pierc'd through the roar of that tumultuous hour!
But some, who straggled from their host too far,
Flash'd their last glance upon the midnight star;
Vengeance assail'd them where was no retreat,
And patriot weapons slew them in the street;
So vast the circuit of the city spread,
Thousands might fall, and pile the heap of dead;
Nor distant friends the shout of tumult hear;
Nor scarce the cannon's signal reach the ear:
In suburbs far remote, resistance rose;
And bath'd their pavements in the blood of foes.
One man I knew &mdash; and he was desperate then&mdash;
In happier times the best of patriot men;
Alone his house he paced, resolved to die,
If o'er his threshold past an enemy:
The warlike powder lay in heaps below;
And torch, hand, heart &mdash; were ready for the blow!
Determin'd with one blast to dash away
Himself, and them, ere he would fall their prey!
The foe beheld &mdash; and shudder'd at the sight,
And left him to his desolated right.
Some silent, reckless, in their chambers sate;
Nor sought, nor shunn'd, nor scarcely fear'd their fate.
Gaz'd on the flame's red glow, that spread on high;
And listen'd to the shouts that rent the sky;
With all that apathy the wretch may know,
Who counts the number of his hours below;
While those who still thought being worth their care,
Fled from the wreck in terror and despair;
Though strong affections, that still clung behind,
With keenest anguish wrung the tortur'd mind.
Forc'd from their homes, from scenes so long ador'd,
From every avenue their numbers pour'd;
The man of wealth, and luxury, and pride,
Disdain'd not, in the flight, the beggar's side;
Th' industrious artizan, in deep despair,
Lost all the savings of a life of care;
His wife, in fear and sorrow, grasp'd his arm;
Her sole defence against impending harm:
In love's strong clasp his trembling child he prest,
And felt its beating heart against his breast;
More dearly priz'd, as danger drew more nigh,
Determin'd to preserve it, or to die!
The tradesman fled his venerated home;
A wand'rer in the eve of life to roam:
And females, madden'd by the worst of fears,
Their hearts in anguish, and their eyes in tears;
Nurtur'd in scenes of elegance and ease;
Grac'd by each polish'd art, and form'd to please&mdash;
Then did their delicate and lovely forms
Endure, unhous'd, the rudely beating storms.
Youths with fond care their feeble parents led;
And dried with filial love the tears they shed:
Some silent droop'd, as in life's last despair&mdash;
Others with fruitless cries assail'd the air.
Still, as with heavy heart the gate they past,
One feeling bade them turn and look their last!
Weeping the ruin that they could not stem,
They fled what had been all the world to them:
Danger behind them, and distress before;
E'en hope portray'd not one bright scene in store.
And O!  if there be aught the mind can wring;
Or plant in life's last days a cureless sting;
'Tis to be doom'd in age from home to part,
And force to unknown scenes a wither'd heart&mdash;
To feel affections, habits, wrench'd away&mdash;
And yet find all these griefs too weak to slay;
Backward to turn in vain the longing eye,
Yet farther stray beneath an alien sky;
To wake, when life hath lost its wish to range,
To new disquiets and a hopeless change.

Accursed War!  thou foe of ev'ry joy!
Thou dost but move creation to destroy!
The plains are blacken'd by thy fiery path;
And blooming valleys wither in thy wrath:
There blazing cities turn th' horizon red&mdash;
And here the ashes of a village spread!
Shedding on man and earth thy pois'nous breath,
Thy track is mark'd by one long line of death.
By thee the emerald sea is stain'd with blood,
That spreads its crimson cloud along the flood:
Fierce as the loudest thunder bursts thy roar&mdash;
Thy worst of lightnings cleave the fated shore!
From thee earth's best and bravest meet their doom;
And nations form one universal tomb:
The mangled lie upon the ground to groan&mdash;
The dying writhe, and pour th' unheeded moan;
While distant friendship breathes the fruitless prayer
For him who bleeds to death, unaided there.
Man, and his hopes, together pass from day;
While anguish rends the thread of life away;
Or driv'n a wand'rer from his earliest home,
But lives an outcast o'er the world to roam.
What desolation is around thee seen!
What hopeless wreck where'er thy rout hath been!
A needful evil, if indeed thou art,
They who provoke thee, least endure thy smart!
The tears of orphans in thy footsteps flow;
Thy tread but echoes to the widow's woe;
Science before thy swift destruction flies;
And art in ruin sinks, and commerce dies:
The muses fly to some calm, peaceful shore;
And agriculture tills the ground no more:
The worst of passions in thy train appear;
And ghastly famine closes up the rear.
Forcing man back to barbarous days again,
His path of light is darken'd by thy reign:
The works of genius, and of time, expire;
Life's charms are lost, and joy and hope retire.
Thus when Vesuvius pours her fires around,
And sudden desolation whelms the ground;
Flames sweep away the valley's lovely bloom,
And sink the fruits of labor to the tomb.

Urburgh!  thou seat of glory, and of bliss&mdash;
Could nothing save thee from a doom like this!
Alas!  and could not riches &mdash; valor &mdash; all
That renders nations safe, prevent thy fall!
What &mdash; when thy sword, that scarce was drawn in vain,
Was winning empire on some distant plain&mdash;
When over far-off seas thy thunders flash'd;
And hostile fleets beneath their surges dash'd&mdash;
While half the world still named thee with alarm&mdash;
Was fate to wither thy undaunted arm;
And strike thee down, 'ere time had stol'n thy power;
And shed this darkness on thy noontide hour!
So have I seen, in manhood's strength and bloom,
Death's victim hurried to a sudden tomb.
But why in anguish should I linger here,
Where every object but provokes a tear?
O'erwhelming sorrow bids me shun the view,
Thou early lov'd &mdash; my native spot &mdash; adieu!
But still, whatever realm salutes mine eyes,
Thy cherish'd beauties will in memory rise;
The brightest scenes that earth to me can show,
Compared with thee, will prove a waste of woe;
Along whatever clime my feet may rove,
Thou still wilt live the idol of my love:
Long as I breathe &mdash; however far I stray&mdash;
My heart is here, nor will be torn away;
To thee my fondness must be ever true;
My home &mdash; my hope &mdash; my native scene, adieu!
