Proud Urburgh!  once fam'd city of this land,
Where golden ease repaid th' industrious hand;
Where commerce flourish'd, and where learning grew;
And wealth, and taste, and grandeur, charm'd the view;
Where life in all its joys and sorrows past,
Guarded by power that promised long to last;
Where fickle fashions daily lur'd the sight,
And noisy mirth disturb'd the sleep of night;
Where scenes of splendour fir'd the blazing square,
Sought by the great, and crowded by the fair:
Thou seat of elegance, and every art
That could delight, seduce, or mend the heart:
So late in glory tow'ring to the skies,
How art thou fallen now, no more to rise!
In splendid ruin still alive to fame,
Thy giant wreck shall long preserve thy name!

Memory, awake!  amidst thy stores retrace
The former bustle of this lonely place;
There, as in life, I view the motley crowd,
In hurry and confusion swift and loud:&mdash;
The fools of fashion, idolizing dress&mdash;
The tatter'd form that wither'd in distress&mdash;
The idle loiterers that loung'd along&mdash;
The group that listen'd to the minstrel's song&mdash;
The Postman hast'ning with his letter'd store,
Oft watch'd by anxious eyes from door to door,
Whose sacred charge of business &mdash; friendship &mdash; love&mdash;
A source of sorrow or delight would prove&mdash;
To wake distress &mdash; despair &mdash; or bid them cease;
Herald of ill &mdash; or messenger of peace:
Or warm with all th' affection of the heart,
That fate had doom'd from all it lov'd to part.
The active Tradesman, jostling through the street,
Who scarce could stop a passing friend to greet&mdash;
Boys, seeking play in ev'ry roomy spot,
The stern command to hasten, heeded not&mdash;
The prancing steed, whose eye shot fire around,
Whose iron tread flash'd o'er the flinty ground&mdash;
The crowd around some casual scene of woe,
Where few reliev'd what many sought to know&mdash;
And children following each unusual sight,
Gazing with vacant wonder and delight!
How often have I seen the hurrying throng,
In ceaseless line, these pavements pass along;
As if the world had urg'd her myriads here,
As to a spot unknown to pain and fear.
How often have I heard, with echoing feet
The sons of labour tread the twilight street;
Or caught the sigh of friendless, houseless woe,
Crouch'd at a door, or wand'ring faint and slow.
Oft, at that early hour, each fabric round
Shook with the waggons grating on the ground,
That slowly brought the gifts of Ceres' hand
To feed th' insatiate mistress of the land;
While chariots rattling as they roll'd along,
Bore the last lingerers from the festive throng.

Here oft returning from the social board,
Where friendship all its inspiration pour'd,
With mind at once enliven'd and reliev'd,
And by the rapid flight of time deceiv'd,&mdash;
Homeward I trod each solitary street,
Whose silence echo'd to my hast'ning feet.
Perchance around the full orb'd, welcome Moon,
Pour'd from the arch of heaven night's silver noon;
Then, as I past, the shadow'd domes I trac'd,
And o'er reflected roofs and turrets pac'd;
And walls and spires, that seem'd my path to pave,
Like sails and masts upon the moonlight wave!

Here oft, with feelings that can ne'er return,
I view'd the hero's tomb &mdash; the patriot's urn&mdash;
The vast Cathedral, solemn to the eye&mdash;
The trophied column tow'ring to the sky&mdash;
The House rever'd where senates held debate,
On whose decisions hung the nation's fate;
For whom, alas!  that rev'rence lives no more;
'Tis now but to remember &mdash; and deplore!
There love of power and lust of gold inspir'd,
And left but few with patriot virtue fir'd:
And thence the nation first receiv'd the blow
That laid her hopes, and strength, and glories low.
Its less'ning line of arch the bridge still shows,
And o'er the wave it's giant shadow throws,
Though scarce a lonely wand'rer hails its view,
Nor vessel stoops her sail while gliding through.

Here stood a home to shield the poor and old,
Where childhood play'd, and age long stories told&mdash;
Where some who trod the busy paths of life,
In sorrow clos'd it's round of care and strife;
Whose past bright days, in bitter contrast brought,
Form'd the last efforts of expiring thought!
Collected here the wreck of human kind&mdash;
The shatter'd frame, and the exhausted mind;
The hopeless spirit, and the sunder'd heart,
By anguish and misfortune wrench'd apart&mdash;
In ev'ry stage of slow or swift decay,
Past the dim hours of life's autumnal day;
Falling like dry and yellow leaves around,
And soon, like them, to mingle with the ground!
There musing melancholy silent sate,
Pond'ring the dark vicissitudes of fate;
And brooding on the past in madd'ning thought,
When life with hope and energy was fraught.
There nerveless palsy shook her trembling head,
And hoary childhood prest his constant bed&mdash;
There the half maniac mus'd his dreaming day,
And idiotism laugh'd its life away!
And thence the young, of parentage unknown,
With hopes, and fears, and feelings all their own,
Launch'd out on life's rough sea, unaided and alone!

The scenes where pleasure held her fairy reign,
And bound the laughing groups in flow'ry chain;
From whom th' unnumber'd hours too swiftly fled&mdash;
For whom too soon the morn its twilight shed&mdash;
The floor which beauty press'd in mazy dance,
And blest her followers with a casual glance&mdash;
The lounge where idlers stroll'd away a noon,
And walks where lovers whisper'd to the Moon&mdash;
The tasteful shops that lin'd the crowded street,
And busy docks that hail'd th' approaching fleet&mdash;
The public gallery of cherish'd art,
Whose beauties soften'd and sublim'd the heart&mdash;
The palace where the monarch sat enthron'd,
And the barr'd prison where the felon groan'd&mdash;
All &mdash; all are fall'n!  and desolation reigns,
Where flourish'd once the mistress of the plains!

Urburgh!  thy suburbs were a scene of joy
The morrow's doubtful ills could not destroy!
When summer evening rob'd the gorgeous sky,
And day was loveliest as it fled the eye,
Passing away in many a crimson streak,
Like the last flush on dying beauty's cheek,&mdash;
The fields were crowded by a mingled throng,
The young, the gay, the active, and the strong.
There careless boys, and men releas'd from care,
In varied pastime, woo'd the evening air&mdash;
There life exhibited her brightest face,
And thoughtless pleasure laugh'd in ev'ry place&mdash;
There, ere the Moon her snowy radiance shed,
Linger'd the student ere he sought his bed&mdash;
And there the servant, loos'd from masters' chain,
Awhile forgot that servitude was pain.
While merchants urg'd their dusty wheels from town,
To breathe the country air on beds of down,
Children in groups were homeward seen to creep,
With lagging steps and eyes half clos'd in sleep;
Or mark'd with sorrow that th' approach of night
Had shut the sport so early from their sight.

Then, Urburgh!  glorious was thy perfect day;
Along thy river's banks what navies lay,
To waft the produce of thy land away;
Or laden with the fruits of other shores,
To feed thy luxuries and swell thy stores.
Thy roads, like rays that from a centre fly,
To ev'ry point diverging, met the eye;
Whence all the country pour'd its wealth to town,
And constant traffic rattled up and down.
From thence th' approaching rustics with amaze
Turn'd on thy numerous spires their eager gaze;
And urg'd with anxious haste their steps along,
To view thy wonders, and to join thy throng.
What bustle did thy crowded inns display,
Where ceaseless business claim'd the restless day.
How rich thy streets!  where trade, to lure the eye,
And tempt the wealthy as they loiter'd by,
Brought from all climes to one capacious mart,
The gifts of nature, and the works of art&mdash;
The glitt'ring metals, shap'd unnumber'd ways,
And jewels darting all their varied rays;
And robes, the rich and lovely to adorn,
Whose fashions liv'd a night, and died at morn&mdash;
All pride, caprice, or fancy could require;
And all that pamper'd sense could e'en desire;
The sails of commerce wafted o'er the main,
From Arctic seas, and India's sultry plain;
Earth's farthest realms, at thy supreme command,
Yielded their stores to deck thy golden land.
When day-light sunk behind the western shore,
Thy lights appear'd a second day to pour;
Whose countless rays, reflected on the eye,
Seem'd like a distant fire that blush'd on high,
And almost chas'd the darkness from the sky.

Here all was intellectual &mdash; glowing &mdash; bright!
No winter of the soul &mdash; no dearth &mdash; no night!
Earth had no wisdom that was stranger here&mdash;
In art no rival &mdash; and in joy no peer.
The land's etherial part; in sanguine hour,
Here came each fiery soul, and rose to power;
Till science soaring reach'd her highest aim,
And pour'd o'er all the world a mental flame.
The country seem'd but made to yield the best
Of art and nature to adorn her crest;
The willing slave to spread her ample board,
With all the field, the garden, could afford.
Howe'er the peasant lov'd his sunny scene,
Boasted his cloudless skies, and verdant green,
Once cherish'd here, he slighted, or forgot,
The listless quiet of the lowly cot;
And found his soul in spell of magic bound,
By more intense delights that spread around.
For him the silent glen had charms no more,
He came to wonder &mdash; tarried to adore!
There life was sameness &mdash; here 'twas ever new,
With fresh excitement op'ning on his view&mdash;
There lack of thought had dimm'd his vacant hours.
While here his soul had scope for all her powers.

Yes, beauty o'er the rural prospect reigns,
Clothes the fair fields, and brightens all the plains.
'Tis joy to breathe the pure and fragrant air,
And see the sun revel in glory there;
To view the clouds in fairy form and hue,
And the fields glitt'ring in a sea of dew;
To see the yellow morn its wings unfold,
And ev'ning set in crimson and in gold;
To tread the silent dell in pensive mood,
And stray by moonlight through the thoughtful wood;
To be in solitude, but scarce alone,
Circled by forms that still are fancy's own;
To climb the mountain wild, and see below
The landscape stretching in the sunny glow,
Till, fading in the horizon's misty blue,
It seems to melt in clouds, and dies from view;
To hear the distant hum &mdash; the murm'ring stream,
And wander lost in many a joyous dream:
These are high pleasures, and who feels them not,
Who views creation as a blank, or blot,
Must own a soul of cold and midnight form,
That thought can never thrill, nor feeling warm.
But still these beauties pall upon the sense;
The sated mind asks something more intense;
Some more etherial, intellectual scope,
To rouse the fancy, and inspire with hope;
To wake &mdash; to fire &mdash; to agitate the soul,
Until she burn and revel past controul;
Sweeping her own created empire round,
That owns no law, acknowledges no bound&mdash;
But, unsubstantial as herself, displays
Unearthly scenes in fancy's brightest blaze!
And hence she flies, where kindred minds inspire,
And still in cities lights up all her fire.

Here, while the spendthrift met a summer friend,
And many a syren lur'd him to his end;
The sons of art inspiring favor found,
And saw their toils with wealth and honor crown'd:
And here, rewarded by the public hand,
The man of genius felt his powers expand;
Heard his proud country echo with his name,
And left life's last &mdash; best gift &mdash; a deathless fame!
And here his eloquence the speaker pour'd
To breathless crowds, who listen'd and ador'd:
Now softly flowing like the glassy stream&mdash;
Now loud as angry seas th' impetuous theme!
With stormy passions then the breast he fir'd,
Or souls with love of liberty inspir'd;
Then with deep pathos forc'd the melting sigh,
And drew the tear in many an answering eye.

Here, when the day approach'd its welcome close,
And wearied tradesmen gave their minds repose;
Where the snug Tavern spread its seats around,
And cheerful fire, and lively groups were found
Each smiling met his neighbour and his friend,
A social hour, releas'd from care, to spend:
Where evening stole in varied talk away,
And mirth and friendship sped the parting day.
The fancied soldier plann'd lost fields to win,
Though he ne'er heard the battle's distant din:
While politicians held prolong'd debates,
And managed in idea mighty states;
Glad, as the horn proclaim'd the newsman near,
Some fresh accounts from foreign climes to hear;
To judge who next might break a despot's yoke;
What army strike some scarce expected stroke;
Turning their arms that liberty to aid;
That tyrants hoped was vanquish'd or betray'd.
Some conn'd what taxes next would press the land,
And wrest the fruits of labor from the hand:
Whether the peace they pray'd would e'er return
Man cease to slaughter man, or cities burn.
There the pretended patriot found his due;
And public measures met severe review:
The Prince himself, in censure nothing spar'd,
Had there his follies or his crimes declar'd.
The wiser few discours'd of nature's laws,
Of operations, and effect, and cause;
While shafts of wit, in harmless strife assail'd,
And manly sense, and tow'ring thought prevail'd.
Then, too, (when day went down in gold and pink,)
When some were met to talk, and some to drink;
Dress'd for the night, the noble and the fair
Sought the gay scene in chariot and in chair;
Where taste and wealth conspir'd to yield delight,
And cards and concerts wing'd away the night;
Where life's refinement strove its best to shew,
And man the brightest polish man can know.

When welcome Sunday brought the lab'rer rest,
And shed its peace in many a weary breast&mdash;
(Sole morn that does not break on care and strife&mdash;
Toil's halcyon dawn &mdash; the holiday of life!)
On that blest day, in all their best array'd,
Th' industrious poor their virtuous pride display'd.
For six long, joyles suns in gloom immers'd,
The rescued race in field and street dispers'd;
Leaving their humble homes, with laughing eye,
To breathe pure air, and see a brighter sky.
The modest wife hung on her husband's arm,
With every virtue grac'd, and every charm;
Glad to embrace a summer hour to roam,
And leave her sorrows and her cares at home:
While sporting round their path their children trod,
Freed from the terrors of the tyrant rod!
That day were seen the humble and the high,
Alike ambitious of the public eye;
In whose gay promenade 'twere hard to tell
Which in the mansion or the cot might dwell.
Propitious day!  a holiday to all!
A heaven to those who own'd religion's call!
Had no divine command that day design'd
To rest the limb, and sooth by pray'r the mind;
Still would I honor with the meed of praise
The man, who rescued from life's stormy days
Those welcome intervals of rest and peace,
When labor sleeps, and care and bustle cease;
That, like the springs amidst a desert plain,
Refresh the traveller for his toil again;
That break life's long, dull uniformity,
And set awhile the prison'd spirit free!
Like verdant isles along the ocean spread,
Or streams of light o'er clouds of darkness shed;
It dawns upon the lab'ring multitude,
An ever-look'd for, never-failing good!
Each day, whose darkness makes it doubly dear,
Seems but to struggle on to bring it near;
It comes like friendship to the captive's cell&mdash;
And for its little season &mdash; all is well!
And though like joy it swiftly glide away&mdash;
The next can scarce be thought a distant day.
Beneath each dome, where men their God ador'd,
What melting eloquence the preacher pour'd!
The guilty heart was shaken in its seat;
And seem'd to rend the breast in which it beat;
And tears &mdash; unbidden tears &mdash; suffus'd the eyes
That lately flash'd defiance at the skies.
While some implor'd the wicked to repent&mdash;
Others, on doubtful points of doctrine bent,
In mystery's mazes led and lost the mind,
That in the labyrinth no path could find.
The wiser part would man's clear duties teach,
And heaven's sublime and plain commandments preach:
Declare its doom when harden'd sinners die&mdash;
And lead the penitent to bliss on high:
Chusing the solemn and appropriate hour,
To blend instruction with religion's power;
While mute attention list'ning crowds bestow'd,
Whose hearts were melted and whose bosoms glow'd!
When o'er the sense the spell of music stole,
Seraphic rapture fir'd the rising soul!
A sacred flame through mortal fibres ran;
And heavenly feelings thrill'd the breast of man!
But now the prayer is hush'd!  the hearers fled&mdash;
The worship ended, and devotion dead:
Such is the boon that discord leaves below;
Her tread an earthquake and her visit woe.

Mistaken statesmen!  who on wars rely,
And to ambition all your powers apply,
In vain you boast your king's &mdash; your country's good,
While wasteful of her treasure and her blood:
In vain your armies vanquish distant coasts,
Your country's vigour dies 'midst all her boasts
How vain &mdash; while healthful labor quits her fields&mdash;
How vain the trophies ev'ry conquest yields;
How worse than vain th' unprofitable show,
That paves the way for want, and chains, and woe!
The source of strength declines unseen away;
E'en the throne sinks in slow but sure decay:
The nation's wealth feeds many a distant shore;
Her men return to till her fields no more:
Accumulated debt o'erwhelms the state
And dark corruption hastens on her fate.
Coercion then but fans the people's ire;
That, smother'd, kindles for a fiercer fire!
And taxes, wrung from toil's unwilling hand,
Drain the last blood-drop from a wither'd land!
Then &mdash; whether myriads toil for bread in vain,
Till madden'd by despair, and want, and pain;
Or lifeless grandeur deck th' unpeopled ground,
Whelm'd in vast ruin falls the nation round,
And hostile bands devouring sweep along,
Fir'd with the thoughts of many a former wrong!
Or slav'ry binds the realm in hopeless chains;
Or lawless anarchy in riot reigns.
Whate'er the means &mdash; destruction waits the land&mdash;
And thousands perish by the vengeful hand!
Thus when besieging armies circle round,
And doom some towering fortress to the ground&mdash;
The miner saps the seat of strength below,
And tottering leaves the unsubstantial show&mdash;
Still proudly frown the towers and massive walls&mdash;
Till burst in wreck the baseless fabric falls!
Whose heaps of ruins, in their giant length
Speak its past glory and its former strength!

Ah!  ye, who rashly hurl the brands of war!
And toil to feed its flames in realms afar!
Who doom mankind to death and anguish there;
And destine realms to famine and despair!
Do ye not shudder at the tales of woe?
Does there no tear, when cities perish, flow?
Ye who at home in lux'ry sit, and plan
The fall of states, the agony of man&mdash;
Does fancy never picture to your souls
Corses that blacken in the flame that rolls?
Do ye ne'er dream you hear your victim's cries&mdash;
Nor see their restless shades in terror rise?
Does placid pleasure smile around your heads?
Is peace the guardian angel of your beds?
How long to you shall men their reason yield?
For your base passions seek the murd'rous field?
Devote their kind to all the woes of strife;
And dash away the little term of life?

Now let me turn my lonely wand'ring feet
Amidst yon ruins of a noble street!
What melancholy silence slumbers here,
Where busy tumult lately fill'd the ear.
Day-dreaming owls in desert chambers sleep;
And birds obscene thro' useless temples sweep&mdash;
Halls that resounded to the voice of bliss,
Now but reverberate the serpent's hiss!
Th' untrodden pavement, all with grass o'ergrown,
Shrouds reptile myriads curl'd beneath each stone.
No feet, save mine, remain to tread the ground;
No other voice invades the still profound;
Nor neighing steed, nor rattling wheel is heard;
Nor midnight sound, except the shrieking bird:
No more the proud Cathedral's deep-ton'd bell
Proclaims the circling hours with solemn swell&mdash;
No more the punctual tradesman marks the day;
Nor idler loiters his long hours away:
In vain the Sun his morning beam bestows;
Here none are left to rise from night's repose:
The Moon in vain her softer radiance pours;
None &mdash; none remain to hail the pensive hours;
Time treads his round unreckon'd and unknown;
And death-like silence claims this spot her own&mdash;
Here holds her speechless reign &mdash; here builds her midnight throne.

Proud e'en in ruins seems the legal hall,
Where sate, the Judge rever'd and lov'd by all;
In whom unbiass'd, stubborn truth was found&mdash;
Who would be faithful &mdash; though his monarch frown'd!
True to the spirit of his country's laws,
He listen'd to no quibbles, quirks, nor flaws:
When men, demanding justice, round him drew,
The peasant and the prince no difference knew&mdash;
His smile assur'd the injur'd and opprest&mdash;
His purity proclaim'd the guiltless blest!
The felon shrank from his deep-searching look,
And with dire presage of his sentence shook!
Th' intent, and not the deed alone, he saw;
And dared bid virtue triumph over law.
No widow twice petition'd him to hear;
No friendless orphan shed a useless tear;
Nor power nor gold avail'd to screen the vile;
Or tempt his frown where duty bade him smile.
The shield of age, the monitor of youth,
His mind he lent to find the hidden truth;
Not wont to glide the surface smoothly o'er&mdash;
But doubtful subjects deeply to explore.
Mercy alone could e'er his justice move;
Slow to condemn &mdash; yet ready to approve&mdash;
His manly firmness, and his virtuous fire,
E'en those who dreaded most, would still admire.
He knew the nation on his truth relied,
To guard her peace and on her rights decide;
And thousands placed their liberties and lands,
Without one fear, in his impartial hands.
What confidence o'er all his virtue shed
What praises settled on his honour'd head
If prayers, sincerely pour'd, may blessings be&mdash;
Most blest he was &mdash; for many a prayer had he!
Peace to his ashes!  he deserved the best&mdash;
His spirit long has found its heaven of rest.
How diff'rent he who oft that seat disgraced!
Thwarting the pleader with indecent haste;
Impatient in a cause he would not like&mdash;
His eye, like angry lightnings, seem'd to strike!
In him corruption, found a willing friend,
Her blackest usurpations to defend.
Opposing all improvements of the law&mdash;
His Prince's smile, the only light he saw!
Too much a courtier to be sternly just&mdash;
Too often sway'd by passion's stormy gust&mdash;
Proud, overbearing, curbing, ruling all;
His fiat thunder'd through the startl'd hall!
Who dared a Prince's follies &mdash; crimes &mdash; to show&mdash;
Found him nor judge nor counsellor &mdash; but foe!
Toiling for infamy to blast his name,
Hated he lived, and died bereft of fame.

Beside yon churchyard wall, his wonted stand,
A sightless beggar stretch'd his needy hand:
One changeless, short petition, met the ear,
Whene'er a passing footstep sounded near&mdash;
The simple prayer &mdash; "Have pity on the blind!"
Urged its full force to every feeling mind.
Nature to him did ne'er her beauties show!
Veil'd were the clouds above, and fields below!
When morning dawn'd &mdash; he hail'd no golden ray,
Nor mark'd the crimson of the closing day:
Nor saw the beam that warm'd his cheek at noon&mdash;
Nor knew from birth the lustre of the Moon!
Shape, figure, reach'd his sense by touch alone;
And all he felt not, was to him unknown;
Veil'd was the form that brush'd him as it past,
Or in his hand the boon of pity cast;
And when the thunder roll'd its peal on high&mdash;
The lightning flash'd not on his sightless eye!
Oft have I seen some neighbour's child bestow
A welcome trifle to relieve his woe.
Wise are those parents who so soon impart
The kindliest feelings to the infant heart!
Themselves, perchance, in fortune's changing hour,
May gladden in their sympathetic power.
Fix'd to that spot, in spite of wind and rain,
Food, home, and raiment, dubious to obtain&mdash;
So past his dull, unvaried life, away,
Unchang'd by gloom of night, or blaze of day!
If that may life be call'd, that cannot mark
The morn, or eve &mdash; one midnight, long and dark&mdash;
Yes &mdash; he had night &mdash; 'twas when his sorrow slept&mdash;
And morn &mdash; when from his still dark couch he crept!
All day his dog beside him stretch'd along,
Feeble in power, but in affection strong;
In all his master's joys, though few they were,
He had an equal and a constant share;
His wants and his commands alike he knew;
As patient s himself &mdash; as needy too!
With more than instinct led him home at night,
Relieving by his love the loss of sight;
His sole amusement, and his faithful guide,
He never wander'd from his master's side;
His piteous form &mdash; his want &mdash; his tatter'd vest&mdash;
Ne'er changed th' affection of that constant breast;
Nor would that honest brute have lov'd him more
Had gold embroider'd every garb he wore.
O!  thus denied the light of heaven to view&mdash;
What active sympathy from man is due!
Doom'd in dark listlessness to pass his days,
While manly vigour every limb displays;
Willing to labour &mdash; but without the power&mdash;
Pity his sole dependence every hour.
But now &mdash; where does he feel his midnight way?
Who soothes the sorrows of his sunless day?
Perchance, e'en of his dumb conductor reft,
He finds nor home, nor hand to aid him, left;
Till, sinking, as he roams from place to place,
He dies amidst the wreck he cannot trace.

Fall'n is the mansion, where the shivering poor
Once gather'd round the hospitable door:
The home of one, by all the needy lov'd,
Whom every plaint of woe to pity mov'd:
He had a hand to raise, a heart to bless,
Whene'er he found his fellow in distress.
Though to the joys of wealth and honor born,
He never from the humble turn'd with scorn&mdash;
And, though by princes favor'd, ne'er forgot
The secret sorrows of the lowly cot:
Not like the heartless, fashionably gay,
Too proud to help the wand'rer on his way:
From ghastly want he never turn'd aside,
Nor view'd the supplicant with lordly pride.
He cheer'd the dungeon where no sunbeam shone;
Sooth'd guilt's despair, and still'd the debtor's groan;
Burst from his limbs the iron links away,
And brought him hope, and liberty, and day.
Glowing with sympathy's unfading fire,&mdash;
The widow's guardian, and the orphan's sire;
Grief would to him an equal pang impart&mdash;
A tear &mdash; th' unfailing passport to his heart!
Unostentatious of the good he did,
He, when he could, his noblest actions hid.
When evening threw her shadows on the ground,
The secret haunts of woe he sought and found;
Where many fallen family he blest;
Too modest to solicit, though distrest!
Ah!  'tis by those, who once in sunshine dwelt,
Fate's dark'ning frown is most severely felt:
'Tis not the Prince, nor Peer, when fallen low,
Who bear the worst extremes of human woe&mdash;
A nation sympathises in their fate,
And many a wealthy friend unbars his gate&mdash;
'Tis not the vagrant and unalter'd poor,
Born in distress, and nurtur'd to endure&mdash;
As he, who lately hail'd the cheering light,
Mourns with intensest grief th' extinguish'd sight&mdash;
So they who once a competence enjoy'd,
Or in the sun of hope their powers employ'd;
Feel, when struck down to poverty and woe,
With tenfold force, the unexpected blow:
And die unseen, unaided, and alone;
Rather than make their wants and sorrows known.
When winter howl'd along the sunless air,
How many found their shelter in his care!
A mantle o'er their freezing limbs he threw;
And half disarm'd the coldest wind that blew:
Fix'd in his aim, by virtuous zeal inspir'd&mdash;
No perils check'd him, and no labours tir'd;
He brav'd the prison's pestilential breath;
And pour'd the prayer that sooth'd the pangs of death&mdash;
Though born to riches, luxury, and ease,
He past his days in scenes and toils like these;
And strove to plant in every youthful mind,
The principle of love to all mankind.
Thus, self-approving, and by thousands blest,
Sweet must have been the feelings of his breast.
So the kind Sun, by planets circl'd round,
Beams plenty, light, and joy on all around.
But now bereft of all his bounty's store,
His power to sooth and succour is no more;
Himself, perchance now wanting what he gave,
Despairing falls, without a friend to save.

Near where yon fallen column dents the ground,
A cheerful Mendicant was daily found;
A stormy life, with vigour, he had brav'd,
Till, round his brow the hoary ringlets wav'd:
He counted seasons, till his hopes retir'd;
Till sons were scatter'd, and till friends expir'd:
But, though his cheeks proclaim'd the lapse of years,
Their furrows never channel'd many tears!
A well-patched wallet, swinging at his side,
A scanty meal, at Nature's call, supplied:
Upheld by confident content, he smil'd,
While passing scenes his tedious hours beguil'd;
And if of food, for present use, possest,
He trusted Providence for all the rest.
Ev'n he, at times, a generous heart could show,
And give his alms to ease another's woe!
Oft' has a group of children round him stood,
Struck with his tatter'd vest, but merry mood;
Amaz'd to see him, though so poor, so glad;
For many a tale &mdash; and many a jest he had&mdash;
The young, he said, should succour one grown grey&mdash;
The aged &mdash; him become as old as they:
Thus his request he made to all apply,
Nor e'er neglected one who past him by.
He call'd no curses on the rich who frown'd;
But like a priest shower'd blessings all around;
Blest those who, cold to pity, heard him crave;
And doubly blest the friendly hand that gave.
What once had been a soldier's coat he wore;
To which in shape a likeness still it bore;
To him, it seem'd what it had earliest been&mdash;
Though scarce one thread of scarlet then was seen.
They who would stoop his varied tale to hear,
Might learn how some the ills of life can cheer;
And find, that, in the darkest waste below,
There still are beams to gild the path of woe:
His buoyant spirit rose o'er every ill;
And he had wit at need, and smiles at will.
Nor was it tales of mirth alone he knew&mdash;
He could talk philosophically too!
The rules and stratagems of war explain;
And plan the field where glory pil'd the slain:
Recall the wild and desperate feats of youth;
And paint past years with more than history's truth:
Describe the scenes of many a distant clime;
And pour a light upon the page of time.
Driv'n from this spot, where may he now appear?
Who now shall listen, and who now can cheer?

Within yon wall I see the ruin'd pile,
Where first the rescued orphan learn'd to smile:
Where oft', at pastime's licens'd hours, the boys
Burst from confinement with exulting noise;
The task forgot, as they impell'd the ball,
Oft' seen revolving high above the wall.
Delighted have I stood to mark their sport
Within the limits of yon spacious court:
Some ran from those who watch'd their steps, to hide;
Some walk'd in life's first friendship, side by side;
Or spread the circle with united hands;
Or fought the mimic field, in hostile bands.
Ev'n they their parties form'd for love or strife&mdash;
In peace or war &mdash; a miniature of life!
Till the unwelcome bell recall'd to school,
Once more to bend to order and to rule:
Then ceased the game; each head dejected hung;
And muttering sorrow murmur'd from each tongue:
As if a sudden cloud had ris'n to shed;
O'er a bright day, a shadow deep and dread&mdash;
Till hope, that paints to every human eye,
Show'd the next hour for play, and show'd it nigh.
Tutor'd for commerce, or refin'd for art,
There emulation first inspir'd the heart,
That often with a pure, undying flame,
Impell'd them on to fortune and to fame:
While knowledge open'd to their mental eyes
Her ample stores, and bade them learn and rise.
Ill-fated boys!  here ye have play'd your last!
Here all your pleasures, all your hopes are past!
Reft by the sword from all the joys of life,
Victims of statesmen's folly &mdash; kingly strife;
Perchance, around this ruin'd realm ye roam,
Without a tutor, and without a home,
Imploring aid &mdash; where aid is found no more&mdash;
Forgetting all that you had learn'd before&mdash;
And chang'd to vagrants, who had lived and died,
Your country's honor, and your teachers' pride.

Lone stands the Theatre, whose raptur'd crowd,
Or fix'd in silence, or applauding loud,
Beheld the mimic scene before them pass,
And look'd on life as in a magic glass&mdash;
Where man, instructed by the Poet's lays,
Compared the present with departed days;
Where forests, caverns, mountains, met the sight&mdash;
Clothed in the blaze of day, or gloom of night:
While palaces, enchanted, seem'd to rise;
And chambers &mdash; prisons &mdash; open'd on the eyes!
As there some vast creative power had been,
That out of nothing form'd the instant scene.
There the beholder, borne on fancy's wing,
Saw distant realms, and changing seasons spring&mdash;
Now view'd Arabia's burning desert glow;
And now the Polar waste of ice and snow&mdash;
And now the ocean, rising into wrath,
O'er which the lightning cleav'd its fiery path;
And heard the thunder rolling through the storm;
Still viewing nature in each varied form&mdash;
While, as by magic, suddenly appear&mdash;
Men, cities, of another hemisphere:
Isles where the savage lurks for human prey&mdash;
And armies marching in their long array&mdash;
Beholding, in that transient space of time,
The colour and the garb of every clime:
While the unravell'd plot held every sense
In breathless expectation, and suspense.
There the swift hours resistless laughter sped;
And many a tear at mimic woe was shed;
There poetry display'd her highest pow'rs;
And scenic fascination charm'd the hours;
While music round in sweetest echoes stole,
Rais'd the affections, and inspired the soul!
What follies have been there by wit display'd!
What scenes, what characters, from life portray'd!
Man, as he really is, unmask'd appear'd;
Admir'd, or scorn'd; detested, or rever'd.
There suff'ring virtue struggled with distress,
Yet proved at last, her power alone can bless:
While the dire passions, raging to the sight,
Taught man to shun their vortex with affright&mdash;
Anger, with swelling cheek, and looks of fire;
And dark Revenge, that fann'd her gathering ire;
And Fear, with rolling eye, and struggling breath&mdash;
And baffled Love &mdash; whose only hope was death!
Sorrow that forc'd the genuine tear to flow;
And Jealousy that fed upon its woe&mdash;
Despair, that dar'd the last &mdash; the worst &mdash; to brave;
And Hate, that dogg'd its victim to the grave&mdash;
These, in succession, past before the view,
In all their native energy and hue!
Yes!  scenes like these a generous warmth impart;
And tune to sympathy the soften'd heart:
Expand the mind &mdash; give brightness to its fire&mdash;
And love of virtue and of fame inspire;
Proud scene of art!  Alas!  for ever fled!
No laughter echoes, and no tears are shed:
No mimic captive groans, no hero dies,
No tyrant threatens, and no lover sighs:
Thalia 'midst the ruins walks in tears;
And in unfeign'd despair Melpomene appears.

Ye searching antiquaries!  here behold
The fate of relics, valued more than gold!
Gone are the ancient scraps that charm'd your eyes&mdash;
Stretch'd in the dust your lov'd Museum lies!
Where doubtful fragments proudly were secur'd,
If haply found in classic ground immur'd.
Coins, that scarce show'd the shadow of a head;
Or hieroglyphics, that were all but fled;
And stones, with characters unknown and rude;
With transport and astonishment were view'd!
Inquiring virtuosi gather'd round,
Big with conjectures and remarks profound:
Sometimes a parchment, worn by damp or time,
A monkish legend, or a mystic rhyme&mdash;
Before them spread its almost hidden lore;
And minds were strain'd its meaning to explore.
Some thought they saw unfolded to their view
A field of hist'ry, and of science too;
And hopes of fortune and of fame enjoy'd,
That deeper search but scatter'd and destroy'd.
Their eager eyes devour'd an ancient seal;
They loved a medal better than a meal!
The feather'd kingdom rang'd the shelves along,
With all their brilliant plumes, but reft of song;
Like gaudy coxcombs, bright in outward shape,
The image of the nobler man they ape.
There stood the Lion, monarch of the plain,
And there the Tiger, who scarce own'd his reign:
Vipers, of forms repulsive, curl'd in glass,
That, arm'd with death, once lurk'd beneath the grass:
Insects, of countless species, swarm'd around;
And ocean's wrecks in inland mountains found:
And animals extinct, now turn'd to stone,
The relics of a race for ever gone:
Embalm'd by nature &mdash; coffin'd in a rock&mdash;
Preserv'd through every elemental shock;
The remnants of a former world to show,
'Ere earth's convulsions laid their species low.
The rarest, loveliest shells, from distant shores;
Metals and petrifactions, gems' and ores;
The finest works of nature and of art
Were treasur'd there in one unrivall'd mart;
The bust, that sav'd from death some honor'd face;
And pictures, all but breathing life and grace:
While rude designs, from savage nations brought,
Display'd the dawn of art's awaking thought:
And manuscripts, of many an age and clime,
There rescu'd from the mould'ring touch of time,
Show'd, as they past from barbarous to refin'd,
The growth of learning, and the march of mind.
There were preserv'd the charters of the land;
Wrung from some despot by a patriot band:
And the long, tedious toils, of letter'd men;
And poems, dash'd from genius' fiery pen!
And there were wrecks from Egypt's ruin'd coast,
Colossal forms no later age can boast:
Whose mountain temples, and whose piles of stone
Stand in huge magnitude, unmatch'd, alone
Whose perfect finish, and extensive plan,
Surpass the rivalship of modern man:
Works that the wrath of ages have defied;
Performed by man in his gigantic pride:
Uniting, in their adamantine length,
His mortal science with supernal strength!
Whose sacred symbols lock'd in midnight gloom
The knowledge of the past, a letter'd tomb&mdash;
By men of learning vainly ponder'd o'er,
In hopes the marble volumes to explore:
Now clos'd from all research, in mystic night,
Unless a master key-stone spring to light.
But proudest stood the sculptor's gems of art,
Those idols worshipp'd by the wisest heart;
And highest in the scale, fall'n Greece!  were thine;
Decreed o'er all competitors to shine
Thou still hast left, to shame each feebler land,
The living marbles of thy matchless hand;
Which seem to boast the immortality,
Their full, complete perfection, caught from thee!
Looking as if sense, feeling, thought, were there&mdash;
This smiling love &mdash; that shrinking in despair!
Here flashing anger; and there frowning hate;
As though they stood the arbiters of fate&mdash;
This, all but stepping from its pedestal&mdash;
That, as if starting back, afraid to fall!
Here smiled a Venus, rich in every grace,
That mortal form could show of limb and face;
And there the serpents coil'd before the eye,
Till the beholder almost turn'd to fly!
These, Urburgh, were thy precious gems; and these
Thy riches brought thee over distant seas;
Or, in thy day of pride, by battle won,
Here shed the light of art's reviving sun:
But now in fragments strew'd by barbarous hands,
Or borne as trophied spoils to distant lands:
Passing, as power removes, from clime to clime;
Till lost for ever in the gulph of time.

Here too the sister art of Painting shone,
In all the charms peculiarly her own.
When through the long, light gallery, I pac'd,
And forms of every shape and colour trac'd;
I seem'd to feel as on some fairy ground,
Where new creations breath'd and bloom'd around:
Where every figure fancy could divine;
And every tint that art could lend to shine&mdash;
And every scene that genius, taste, could show;
Embodying the beautiful below&mdash;
Enchain'd the ling'ring sight, whose raptur'd sense
Alone inspir'd the soul with joy intense.
In fancy 'twas another world, that gave
To view the mighty who had past the grave&mdash;
Vision'd in thought &mdash; I seem'd myself to find
Among the greatest &mdash; brightest of mankind!
And look'd as on the living forms of men,
Whom mortal tongue could never greet again:
And held communion with the wise and just,
Whose bones for ages had been strew'd in dust!
Still &mdash; still remember'd &mdash; e'en in sorrow dear&mdash;
The shadows of those beauteous works appear;
Which here a nation's admiration drew,
And fann'd the glorious pride from whence they grew!
In memory yet full many a picture lives;
Glowing in all the fire that genius gives:
I see the forms that seem to think &mdash; to move&mdash;
Swelling in wrath &mdash; or melting into love!
The battle rages &mdash; flashes on the wall!
And armies seem to close, and squadrons fall!
Th' assassin's dagger drinks his victim's blood&mdash;
The vessel sinks beneath the whelming flood:
The ambush'd lion springs upon the steed;
Stiff'ning in fear the form he dooms to bleed!
And powers supernal glide beneath the storm,
Whom demon passions darken and deform!
The lovely landscape lengthens on the sight,
In noon's warm flush, or morning's golden light;
O'er eve's soft scene the crimson clouds are driven,
In all the varied drapery of heaven:
The distant mountains melt into the hue
That veils the horizon's verge in misty blue;
Or, pour'd upon the water, Dian's beam
Arrays in silver light the slumb'ring stream.
Th' historic scene its silent story speaks&mdash;
His hate the tyrant on the patriot wreaks
What passions in the crowded canvass glow!
Each figure seems to act as once below&mdash;
Till the whole tale of pity, love, or ire,
Bursts on the soul in characters of fire!
And more than e'en remembrance can restore&mdash;
Here have I seen, but now can see no more.
Yet those whose treasur'd beauties still survive,
Memory in sorrow long shall keep alive;
Long as one shadow of the past remains&mdash;
Long as the spirit drags its earthly chains.
Yet still the soul shall bless that faithful power,
That keeps some charm to sooth the present hour;
That rescues from the past, when life was bright,
Some form to cheer its dim succeeding night;
And gives the spirit, else of all bereft,
The only beam a darken'd fate has left.
So the worn traveller, fix'd at home at last,
Reviews the brightest scenes through which he past;
And thither borne on fancy's wing of light,
Ponders their beauties with renew'd delight.

Far different scene did yon recess display&mdash;
Where, veil'd in clouds of smoke that darken'd day,
A crowded, noisy Manufactory stood;
A source of public or of private good.
There did a toiling race their lives employ,
And thence arose each dearly purchas'd joy:
The long &mdash; long hours, in changeless dullness, past;
Each day, each year, a picture of the last&mdash;
The drear, uninteresting task, the same;
Life, scarce relieved by pleasure, hope, or fame.
There did they hasten soon as morning rose;
And there were chain'd beyond the evening's close:
From earliest youth the beaten path they trod;
Nor left it &mdash; but to mingle with the sod.
For them the sweets of nature bloom'd in vain:
The scented valley, and the breezy plain;
Scarce for their eyes the golden clouds appear'd&mdash;
Nor for their feet the hills their summits rear'd&mdash;
Scarce time could father spare t' embrace his child&mdash;
Few days of joy a darken'd year beguil'd;
'Twas toil &mdash; 'twas sleep &mdash; a hurried meal &mdash; a breath;
A cold, dark, caged existence, closed by death;
There droop'd the fetter'd soul; the gifted mind,
Sunk to the lowest level of its kind;
And feeling that her wings could never soar,
Her pinions clos'd, and thought of flight no more!
O!  surely, bounteous Heav'n could ne'er decree
Such gloom should shroud the spirit's brilliancy:
Did never that ethereal light bestow
To die in darkness, or to set in woe!
The glorious hand that plac'd the Sun on high,
Gave it to glow &mdash; to shine &mdash; for every eye:
No niggard of his boon, he shower'd on earth
Blessings for all, the right of all by birth;
Nor e'er intended that incessant toil
Should freeze the heart's last hope, the lip's last smile.
And truth proclaims that land's unnatural state,
Where half the people sink in wayward fate;
Who sleep to dream of joy that ne'er arrives;
And only wake to labour through their lives:
Where hoary age is torn from rest away,
And fetter'd childhood weeps its loss of play;
And manhood sees his years of prime expire,
As the Sun wastes on desert sands his fire.
The state's demands, each year increasing, tore
From the despairing labourers half their store;
And left them in their ravag'd homes to feel
The desolating wounds they could not heal!
Now freed too late, perchance the hostile change
But leaves them houseless wanderers to range.

