Beneath an oak, whose blasted form
Rose on Plinlimmon's summit grey,
Bare to the wild unpitying storm,
The dying harper lay.
His cheek was pale, parch'd was his tongue,
His hoary head dejected hung;
Wild wand'ring on each gale that blew,
His scatt'ring locks dishevell'd flew.
He mourn'd each joy, each blessing fled,
Country lost, his brethren dead;
For o'er each hill, each lonely plain,
A tyrant spread his hateful reign;
And still from vales that lay afar
Echoed the sullen sound of war;
And still the blaze ascending high
Illumin'd all the glowing sky.
Through all the desolated scene
He turn'd an anxious eye in vain&mdash;
No wand'rer came, no friend was near,
To wipe away the trickling tear;
No voice, whose accents might impart
A shade of comfort to his heart&mdash;
But Piety's celestial pow'r
Shone sweetly on that awful hour;
A ray of sacred light was giv'n,
That shew'd the op'ning joys of heav'n;
And still that harp, renown'd of yore,
Within his feeble arms he bore;
And once again (a transient gleam)
A spark of inspiration came.
Again his fingers dar'd to try
The trembling chords of extasy;
But vanish'd was that heav'nly art
That once could strike the throbbing heart&mdash;
Past was that echo, loud and clear,
That held the captivated ear.

"UIlin, thy soothing strain no more
Shall rouse the rural throng;
Nor glen, nor grove, nor mountain hoar,
Again shall echo to thy song.
At length the vital tide retires,
At length the fading spark expires;
Through ev'ry nerve, through ev'ry vein,
I feel a dreary chillness reign
Involving darkness spreads around,
And all is solitude profound.
Oh!  see the bier &mdash; oh!  mark the throng
In slow procession pass along:
Solemn resounds the warning knell&mdash;
The gloomy grave appears &mdash; Vain fleeting world, farewell!

"And sure that sweetly-pleasing strain,
That warm'd the sinking soul with holy fire,
Rose as the music of the heav'nly choir;
And hark!  it sounds again!
O'er yonder skies
Now turn thine eyes,
And see what varying views arise!
Aloft behold
The gates of gold
The circling courts of heav'n unfold!
Around them pours a dazzling stream of day;
And lo!  descending on the sparkling plain,
Cutting with airy plume the blue serene,
The messenger of fate pursues his way.
His awful air, his form divine,
Declare him of the seraph line:
Ambrosial tints his waving wings adorn,
Light as the genial gales of morn:
Around his path, around his way,
Mark how the glancing lightnings play!
His course at pleasure see him changing,
O'er the fair fields of ether ranging,
Through distant tracts the prospect bending,
And thence again at ease descending;
See!  now he turns &mdash; and now he steers
Where yonder sunny cloud appears;
Thence, wheeling from the clear cerulean height,
Down the wide cope of heav'n at once he bends his flight.

"Nearer he draws, and nearer still,
In awful majesty expos'd,
His solemn tidings are disclos'd:
Rever'd, oh Heav'n, be thy gracious will!
Oh!  thou, thus sent from scenes on high,
Conclude at once this ling'ring strife;
Dissolve each bond, each earthly tie,
And snatch me from the ills of life!
Reveal'd by thee,
Methinks I see
The forms that fill futurity;
Methinks I hear the hallow'd throng
Pour the warm extatic song;
One ardent thought, one glowing soul,
Appears to animate the whole.
Arising still, the solemn sound
Sweeps the etherial dome around;
Each look, each voice, each beaming eye
Joins the full flow of harmony:
To them the blissful boon is giv'n,
The joy, the love, the light of heav'n;
To them the spot where, clad in charms divine,
Thrones, donimations, pow'rs, and blazing seraphs, shine.

"Misfortune, now thy fleeting sway,
Thy frowns are rendered vain;
The transient terrors of thy reign
Are but the evils of a day:
The ling'ring pang, the struggling sigh,
The tear that trembles from the eye,
Affliction's ever-changing form,
Each care that rends the tortur'd heart,
Like summer's transitory swarm,
Like meteors mingling with the storm,
All, all at once depart:
Thick hov'ring round
Yon chasm profound,
Alternate disappear
The joys, the pains,
The varying scenes,
That mark this mortal sphere.
But see!  the sacred form from realms of day
Bends the bright eye on heav'n, and warns me far away.

"Where is that dread appalling pow'r&mdash;
Where is that spectre, stern and bare,
The grisly phantom of despair,
The guardian of this awful hour?
Oh!  what is death? &mdash; a flitting scene,
A trivial stroke, a partial pain.
'Tis guilt alone whose aching eye
Should close against eternity;
'Tis guilt on whose afflicting end
The tear, the groan, should still attend.
Let Virtue guide thy pilgrimage beneath,
Thy youth to Piety be giv'n,
And Faith shall lead thy falt'ring steps to heav'n,
And Peace shall smooth the low'ring brow of death.
Oh!  learn to seek the tranquil train
That bend to Reason's placid reign:
Mild Charity, with melting eye;
Devotion, ardent and sincere;
And steady Hope, that looks on high&mdash;
These shall direct thy progress here;
These shall through life their sacred pow'r employ,
And deck the final hour with happiness and joy.

"Strike the resounding string again,
And pour aloud the solemn strain;
Let joy, let transport touch the lyre
With native force, with native fire!
On Rapture's rising wings I fly!
I trace the road to realms on high!
'Tis past &mdash; 'tis o'er&mdash;
The glittering shore,
The world of light and life appears:
Ye heav'nly hosts, convey me hence&mdash;
Oh!  lift me to the spheres!
'Tis silence all &mdash; the falt'ring song
No more the echoing hills prolong;
The trembling nerve, the palsied hand,
No more the yielding wires command;
The votive harp, no longer struck,
At once his loos'ning grasp forsook;
His bosom heav'd a parting groan&mdash;
The spring, the source of life was gone!
His voice, was weak, his eye was dim;
Sank was each pulse, and stiff each limb;
The blood was chill'd in ev'ry vein;
And Death &mdash; all conqu'ring Death!  frown'd on the fatal scene.
