Of love and sorrow, 'tis a peerless tale&mdash;
Then press it softly to thy gentle breast;
I'll share the fear that makes thy pure check pale;
I'll guess the wish that may not be confest.
Unhappy pair! &mdash; and yet to them was given
That earthly joy which tasteth most of heaven;
Oh!  sweet and bitter, let our mixt tears flow,
Where on the grave of love, the drooping violets grow.

To mortals there is given a fleeting life:&mdash;
A life? &mdash; Ah no!  a wild, vain, hurrying dream!&mdash;
A tempest of pride &mdash; passion &mdash; sin &mdash; and strife!
A dark, deep, restless, ever-foaming stream.
When fortune lifts us high, or sinks us low,
We feel the motion &mdash; know not where we go;
Love only, like the oil upon the sea,
Gives to man's tossing soul, repose and liberty.

'Tis true, that they who love are seldom born
To a smooth destiny &mdash; Love buds in peace;
But foulest wizards in the air have sworn
To blast its beauty ere its leaves increase.
The lovers dare not look &mdash; fiends watch their eyes;&mdash;
They dare not speak &mdash; fiends intercept their sighs;&mdash;
A spell is on them mute, o'ermastering,&mdash;
Dumb sorrow o'er them waves her dark depressing wing.

But let the faint heart yield him as he may,
Danger sits powerless on Love's steady breast;
The lovers shrink not in the evil day;&mdash;
They are afflicted &mdash; but are not opprest;
To die together or victorious live&mdash;
That first and holiest vow &mdash; 'tis theirs to give:
United &mdash; tho' in fetters &mdash; they are free;&mdash;
They care not tho' the grave their bridal bed should be.

It may be that if Love's expanding flower
Is forced to close before the storm's keen breath,
That closing may protract the blooming hour,
Which is so short in all that suffers death.
The silence, and the sorrow, and the pain,
May nourish that which they attack in vain.
The lowly flame burns longest &mdash; humble sadness
Is kindlier to Love's growth than free unvaried gladness.

But oh!  how glorious shone their ruling star,
Which carried them with budding loves to heaven;
Where angels welcomed in bright realms afar
With a full cup which scarce to taste was given,
While any remnant of terrestrial sin
Had power to stain the holy draught within,
They died; &mdash; young Love stood by them calmly sighing,
And fann'd with his soft wing the terrors of their dying.

Read not of Juliet and her Romeo,
With tragic trembling, and uplifted hair;
Be mild, fair maid, and gentle in thy woe,
As in their death were that most innocent pair.
Upon the tomb o' the Capulets there gleams
No torch-light, but a moon of tender beams;
Then hate not Love because a JULIET died,
But seek to sleep like her by a true lover's side.
