It happen'd once upon a day,
In the most pleasant month of May,
Upon a year foretold langsyne,
The eighteen hundred twenty-nine,
Of which enlighten'd martyrs said
'Twould see the dire foundation laid
In kingdom or in isle adjacent,
Of Scotland's ruin and debasement.
Alack for my old native land,
Of the bold heart and ready hand;
Of the wild mountain, moor, and bracken,
I hope these prophets were mistaken.

Man cannot tell, chance as it may,
A simple tale I only say,
Of two young blithesome shepherd blades,
With their good collies and grey plaids,
Who chanced to meet, near fall of night,
Upon Mount-Benger's lofty height:
The sun lay swathed, in vapours pale,
Beyond the moors of Megget-dale,
And the mild gloaming's lovely hue,
Her shades of purple and of blue,
And radiance of her cherub breast,
From golden window of the west,
Told to the shepherd's practised eye
That they were harbingers of joy;
Angels of love sent forth to borrow
For him a goodly day to-morrow.

It was a scene that even the hind
Could not survey with careless mind,
Although accustom'd well to see
Nature in mountain-majesty;
For every ray the welkin threw
Slept on St Mary's mirror blue,
In blushing glories, out of number,
Like beauty in a mimic slumber.

The Yarrow, like a baldrick bright,
Upon the vale lay bathed in light;
And all her burns and branching rills,
Like silver serpents of the hills;
While far around the eastern heaven,
The dark-blue mantle of the even
Was softly heaving up the sky,
So silent and so solemnly,
As if day's fading beauties bland
Were shaded by an angel's hand.

One portion more of mortal prime,
A splendid shred of living time,
Down in the shades of Death was fading,
And o'er its bier the pall was spreading.

SANDY.
Ah, Will!  here we can look abroad,
On all the goodness of our God.
We see the heavens benignant smile
On this beloved and favoured isle;
Our Maker prompt the land to bless,
And our hearts glow with thankfulness.
But what avail these blessings sent,
If by our rulers all misspent?
It grieves me more than I can tell
To see the King we loved so well,
And Hero firm, whose course sublime
Has been the marvel of our time,
Betray the trust in them reposed,
Abandon faith, and undisclosed,
To have their perjured measures driven
On, in the teeth of earth and heaven.
Confound them all!  For I assever
They're all mansworn, and d&mdash; for ever.

WILL.
Take time, take time, dear neighbour Sandy,
Ere with rebellion's birr I brand thee.
There's such a thing, can you not see,
As fierce and fell necessity;
And here, I solemnly protest,
I think that all's done for the best.
If 'twill not work as hoped &mdash; what then?
The Senate must annul't again;
But glad am I, as one approver,
That that most sickening plea is over;
For ay since I could climb a hill,
We have been bother'd with that Bill.
Ruin awaited the denial&mdash;
'Tis fair and just to make the trial.

SANDY.
Poor Will! &mdash; Daft Will!  think on the time
When o'er these heights and rocks sublime,
Our fathers for the sacred cause
Of truth, and liberties, and laws,
From wrath of Popish tyrant's slaves,
No shelter found but in their graves;
Hunted like bandits to the last,
Their forms lay bleaching in the blast,
Till found by shepherds on the waste,
With Bibles in each bloody breast;
And these were all were left to tell
Their names, or in what cause they fell.
Who thinks of that must think with pain,
Of setting up that race again&mdash;
Who, like the devil, let them get
But one small finger in the state,
And soon they'll wrench a hole therein,
Will let both Pope and Popery in;
And the Reformed religion must,
Once more degraded, bite the dust.

WILL.
The Lord forbid!  as I should pray it,
I dare not think it, far less say it:
But wiser men than you or me
In this expediency agree.
As counterbalance to your clamours,
I take the Reverend Doctor Chalmers,
Whose heavenly and whose bold appeal
On my conviction placed the seal;
Thomson and Inglis, men of note;
Frank Jeffrey and Sir Walter Scott;
The world more to their judgment looks
Than kings or queens, or lords or dukes:
When ruling heads like these combine,
What's to be thought of yours or mine?

SANDY.
Of Chalmers I shall say but little;
He meddled with a point right kittle,
And said what ill became that day
A Protestant divine to say.
The best of men deceived may be;
They have been so, and so was he;
But he'll yet live to change his boast,
And see his error to his cost.
I grieve for Thomson's dereliction;
But he's so given to contradiction,
That, feud and ferment to prolong,
He'll take a side he knows is wrong:
Jeffrey's religious belief
Is something like himself &mdash; a brief;
And though Sir Walter may be steady,
He's more than half a Pope already,
Which I can prove a strict reality,
From something said in Old Mortality:
But though an angel stood on high,
Even in yon bright and beauteous sky,
And swore with right hand to the heaven,
That Popery's rights should back be given,&mdash;
I would distrust the dire award,
And dread a demon's voice I heard.

&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;

"See yon &mdash; and hold your peace for ever,"
Cried startled Will, with quake and quiver,
And pointed to a dreadful guest
That reared his pale form in the west.
Standing upon a frieze of gold,
He fill'd the west with human mould;
His eye scowl'd with the gleam of death,
As if in sorrow and in wrath;
His right hand like a polar ray,
Was heaved above the milky way;
The evening star kithed like a gem,
In buckler of his diadem:
And altogether such a lightness,
Such angel features and such brightness,
Never appeared on Scottish sky,
Or startled shepherd's fearful eye.

Will saw in it the guardian sprite
Of Erin, smiling with delight;
But Sandy knew the visitant,
For Angel of the Covenant,
Rising in wrath with lifted hand,
Indignant o'er a guilty land:
To swear in language motion'd stronger,
The church's time should be no longer.

With beating hearts and bristling hair,
Our shepherds left their mountain lair
For the last moorcock of the fell,
Had mounted from the heather bell,
With rigid wing and crow elate,
And silent sunk beside his mate.
Hush'd was the pipe of grey curlew,
And lonely plover's plaintive whew,
The bleating kid had sought its dam,
The ewe cowered down beside the lamb;
And bogies of the darksome cleugh,
Put on their robes of deadly hue
The harden'd sinner to belay,
And turn his steps another way;
An eirier scene man never saw,
From the dark cone of Benger-Law.
The eastern emerald glimmered high,
The polar bear had oped his eye;
While, worst and dreadfullest by far,
The giant of the western star
Frown'd in his majesty sublime,
O'er shadows of the western clime;
Sooth it was time, one's spirit feels,
For our two herds to take their heels!
