Where Surfleet's learning Spire ascends the sky,
And Cottages below and Houses lie;
Her Sons, seven hundred, draw the vital air,
Yet five and twenty pounds reward the Curate's care.
(O stipend vile for one who humbly boasts
To serve the Altar of the Lord of Hosts!)
Two Inns there are, pride of each sturdy clown,
When purse runs high, the Mermaid and the Crown.
Too oft their walls with boisterous mirth resound,
With blood and battles too, when Whitsuntide comes round.
Then Village races, Village sports are seen,
And Lads with vacant stare, Lasses with joyous mien.
With flutes and hautboys, streamers gay display'd,
The annual sermon preach'd, the annual dinner made,
Our poor men's club with friendly pomp parade.
A school endow'd by Lady Fraiser's care,
To whose fair seat children twice ten repair,
Thence to the neighbouring church to join in holy prayer.
A Workhouse too, in which the poor are fed,
Unstinted, not at so much farm'd per head
By some vile wretch who locks the cupboard door,
And, poor himself, half starves his Brethren poor.

But chief my Muse attunes her unbought lays,
To sing, Briggs, Burton, Searle, your well-earn'd praise.
See thirteen tenements, your gift, and one
Now rising into use, the work not fully done.
There Labour, worn with age, awhile retires,
Till Life's dim lamp in Death's dull mist expires.
There Widows with their numerous Children dwell,
Who love the self same tale full oft to tell:
Still to deplore their lonely wretched lot,
Yet bless the hand that built their humble cot.
There antiquated Maidens all day long
Turn the same droning wheel, tune the same droning song.
Husbands and Wives of younger days are there,
Whose brood increasing, cause increasing care;
Yet Love, by Heaven implanted in the breast,
Soon calms domestic jars and broils to rest.
The lisping infant, smiling on its sire,
Unbends his wrinkled brow, allays his look of fire.

Hail, heavenly Love!  Man's soul, bereft of thee,
Foams like the ravings of the troubled sea:
But, by thy magick lull'd to peaceful sleep,
Shows the calm surface of the glassy deep.

Each tenement is seen in good repair,
The chambers ciel'd exclude the searching air.
Dark doors, white window-frames, each other nigh,
Attract the notice of the passer-by,
While separate gardens herbs and plants supply.
These houses, gardens, rent-free to the poor
Are given, for life, with many comforts more.
A good estate has crown'd your bounteous deed,
To help the impotent at utmost need.
The stock of coals your charity bestows,
Stern Winter warms, and melts his frosts and snows.
A coat is yearly to a poor man given,
What day thy soul, O Burton!  flew to Heaven.

Hail, sacred Charity, thy pious force
All ills of life can lighten in their course.
Bless'd be that Power, which bade thy influence prove
The brightest emblem of redeeming Love.
In dark Affliction's night, when sorrows flow,
Thy healing balm can ease the Mourner's woe.
When other succour, other help is vain,
Thou point'st, by Faith and Hope, to yonder plain,
Where thron'd in clouds the righteous Judge appears,
To wash away our guilt, and wipe repentant tears.

Briggs, Burton, Searle, farewell!  may Heaven record
Your pious labours, grant a rich reward,
Through Christ's most precious blood, since that alone
For sinful Ma's transgressions can atone!

O Charity divine, our souls inspire,
May ages yet unborn feel thy celestial fire:
And Surfleet ever show thy influence blest,
Befriend the friendless, succour the distrest!
May future Benefactors still arise,
To smooth the road through life, and guide to brighter skies!
