As Elgin homeward o'er th' Aegean wave,
Fam'd Parthenon, thy rescued glories bore,
While Greeks too weak, too sordid Turks, to save,
Their costly cement lost in vain deplore;
Shout from their tombs the demigods of yore,
Heroes and kings their specter'd forms uprear,
Seek in congratulating throngs the shore,
And as they view the parting vessel ride,
Applaud their Guardian Chief, and greet him o'er the tide.

On speeds the vessel with her well-earn'd prize,
Till sudden calms arrest her stately sweep;
Hush'd is the expanse of ocean, earth, and skies,
And a new firmament appears to sleep
On the smooth mirror of the azure deep,
The wave with splendour glowing as a flame;
And while the crew a breathless silence keep,
As erst to sage Ulysses, Pallas came
And cheer'd her favour'd Scot, and prophesied his fame.

"Oh, Patron of my Arts, thrice bless'd the hour,
When Athens' Sculptures to thy charge were giv'n;
Trophies rever'd!  thine be the envied pow'r
To rear for Albion skill deriv'd from Heav'n,
Tho' Vandal Turks with impious hand had riv'n
The mould'ring relicks of my hallow'd fane,
And Time, with twice one thousand years, had striv'n
T' impress those marble heights with cank'ring stain:
At length 'twas thine to save what Time would spare in vain.

"Mine was the Temple, &mdash; and be mine the care
To crown the Guardian who arrests its doom;
No intellectual praises will I spare&mdash;
Pallas transfers her honours now to Broom,
Where Hymen's joys restor'd, thy hopes illume;
For know &mdash; the fair Eliza thou shalt wed,
Eliza, 'neath whose Grecian form shall bloom
Minerva's wit with Attic learning fed,
And many a future pledge shall bless thy honour'd bed.

"To hail th' avenger of their native seat,
The Grecian Deities already join,
Venus secure to Albion shall retreat,
Where beam her graces and her form divine,
Where reigns Apollo, and th' inspiring Nine:
Lo!  Caledonia's heroes Mars shall greet,
And crown her warlike sons:  the God of wine
His honours while you quaff, pure balm of life,
Shall find his own Cithaeron on the hills of Fife.

"Tho' Ocean's King engulph one hapless bark,
Still, jealous of my peaceful Olive's reign,
Thetis, to quell his rage and malice dark,
Points to his fav'rite Isles i' th' Western main,
(There are his trophies, there his loftiest fane)
Pallas for them shall save the precious freight,
The adverse tempest and the foe restrain,
Fair Science rescu'd from impending fate,
Shall bless the hallow'd hand uprear'd to consecrate.

"While Learning owns my renovated pile,
The classic pen thy labours shall engage;
While th' envious titled Bard from Britain's isle,
Whose selfish spleen no Patriot cares assuage,
Shall reap contempt from a discerning age.
Poets unborn thy honours shall proclaim,
And Time, enrolling in bright History's page
Pomfret and Arundel with Elgin's name,
Shall give to thine alone, pre-eminence of fame."
