THYRSIS.
If scenes like these can tempt my friend to share
The genial softness of the spring-tide air,
Here let us sit, and view the fertile vale,
The swelling woodland waving with the gale;
Or through those walks high-arch'd with nut-trees stray,
And, while soft music echoes from each spray,
Catch the wild notes melodious as they flow,
Mix'd with the murm'rings of the brook below.

AMINTOR.
In these dull walks you ever love to waste
The fleeting hours, and falsely think it taste.
See through that glade those gloomy turrets rise,
O'ertop the trees, and swell towards the skies.
These hanging woods, this dismal, dreary dell,
"Where moping Melancholy loves to dwell,"
Bring to my mind what ancient legends tell
Of fairy forests, where in some lone glen,
In deserts deep far mov'd from mortal ken,
Stands the huge castle thickly planted round
With magic quicksands and enchanted ground;
Whence, o'er the wild heath, many a fiery sprite
Guiles the lost trav'ller in the starless night.

THYRSIS.
Speak, ye fair Dryads, ye who best can tell,
Does Dulness ever in your woodland dwell?
Or through these woods, when carelessly you rove,
Trace ye her footsteps in the chesnut grove?
A Nymph there is, a musing, pensive maid,
Whom oft I meet within this cooling shade,
With folded arms now wand'ring through the wood,
Now thoughtful bending o'er the sparkling flood.
In moods like these whene'er she meets the eye,
Scorn points the finger of each passer-by.
Sweet Solitude!  from thee the pleasing theme,
The fond illusion, the poetic dream,
From thee, sweet charmer, flows a magic pow'r,
To calm too busy thought, or fill the vacant hour.
Whene'er with thee in this cool shady seat,
I find a shelter from the noon day heat;
For us the stockdove coos in wilder note,
For us the linnet strains his tuneful throat.
Each note grows sweet in the woodlark's song;
Each breeze breathes music as it moves along;
The stream looks brighter, as the glitt'ring spray
Breaks o'er the pebbles that obstruct its way.

AMINTOR.
Come, come, friend Thyrsis, to the town repair,
This melancholy dullness will forsake you there.
Can rocks, can woods, can all this dreary scene,
Though newly dress'd in Nature's livery green,
Vie with the sweet variety we find
In town to charm us, and delight the mind?
Scenes ever new, gay views that never cloy,
Day after day still teeming with new joy;
Where every hour to the eye displays
A thousand charms that charm a thousand ways;
The morning lounge, the Park's long cavalcade,
The ev'ning rout, the midnight masquerade,
The play were ***** all in charms appears,
To warm the heart, or melt the eye in tears.
But when some ill-grac'd actor treads the stage,
Beauty and fashion then our eyes engage;
Where, rob'd in elegance, supreme they sit,
The bright-ey'd critics of dramatic wit.
Ev'n so I've seen, in some great florist's show,
The gay carnations rang'd in many a row;
White vie with white, with colour colour vie,
Each spreads its charms to stop the wand'ring eye;
But at each view such crowds of beauties rise,
It still roves doubtful where to fix the prize.
Spend but a winter in such scenes as these,
And woods, and rocks, and streams, will lose their power to please.

THYRSIS.
Ev'n now, my friend, I fear the dreadful day,
When Fate shall force me from these fields away;
And as the Sun, when sinking from the view,
Tints every object with a brighter hue;
So now these scenes with double lustre shine,
For soon, too soon, I cease to call them mine.
How bright the tinge that gilds yon distant scene,
Blow sweet ye breezes, breathe in gentle sighs;
Look down ye groves, no more ye meet these eyes,
How smooth the Stour, how still its mazes glide,
Crown'd with green alders down its grassy side,
And willow boughs, whose drooping branches seem
To weep their dew-drops on the passing stream.
Here in this copse the earliest blackbird sings,
Under the hedge the earliest violet springs;
Here Zephyr, gathering odours as he goes,
Steals his first kisses from the new-blown rose;
Here bees, sweet banks of fragrant flowers among,
(Whose murmurs yet breath soft in classic song,)
With busy hum Hyblaean sweets prepare,
Hyblaean sweets they seldom live to share.

AMINTOR.
Thyrsis, farewell!  since Happiness you deem
To loiter listless by a purling stream;
Enjoy, fond swain, those gifts thy fields bestow,
Green willow wreaths to bind thy frantic brow.
