'Twas at the venison feast, the Borough won
By &mdash;'s patriot Son,
At top in pleasing state
The portly Mayor sate
As on judicial throne.
His Aldermen were placed around,
Their robes of scarlet with furr'd honours bound,
(A rich desert the banquet crown'd.)
The lively Sheriffs by his side
Each with each other vied
In suits of newest fashion's pride:
Genteel, gallant, and courtly pair,
Well ye deserve the charming fare!
The Chaplain sleek arose,
At bottom in his place,
With hasty accents to say grace:
Instant the keen-edg'd guests sit close,
And social joys embrace.
The course began with fish,
As fresh as one could wish,
Brought down by th' mail, a lordly dish!
A turbot's spreading form bespoke the treat,
With luscious lobster-sauce complete;
Soles, whitings, dorys &mdash; Quin's great boast,
Who first them sought on Torbay's coast,
Tasted &mdash; nor from his palate hurl'd,
But stamp'd their worth &mdash; himself the glutton of the world.
The guttling crowd admire the ample size;
A present rarity, one shouting cries;
A present rarity, another loud replies.
With ravish'd ears
The Town-Clerk hears;
Affects the smile,
And carves the while,
And seems all great with Peers.
The praise of Sudbury's champaign park now chim'd in pat:
The bucks so flavour'd, and the does so fat.
A sovereign haunch in triumph comes,
Greeted with soft-applauding hums.
Now bring the jelly-sauce &mdash; it comes!  it comes!
Venison ever fat and young
Foremost does 'mong dainties range;
Venison's dainties are a treasure,
Venison fills up Lord Mayor's leisure.
Rich the treasure,
Sweet the pleasure,
Only business after 'Change.
Charm'd with the sight our Chief grew vain,
Talk'd his great dinners o'er again,
And how he outdid all, the Judges once to entertain:
He felt importance big arise,
With glowing cheeks and rolling eyes,
Yet check'd his pride &mdash; call'd for the tankard,
And of the nutmeg beverage drank hard;
But first, for zest, did choose
Squeez'd lemon to infuse.
He saw the surloin great and good,
Of which to fill his plate
Became his high estate
(Old English royal food),
Deserted now &mdash; for why the need?
On this he every Sunday fed:
Not so the ham and fowls go by
Untouch'd, the hare, goose, pigeon-pie.
With napkin under chin he now fetch'd breath,
Revolving, with a frequent smack,
The quick removes above, below;
How some did this, some that attack;
And wit began to flow.
My mighty masters, pleas'd you see
Our viands rare of rich degree,
'Tis but your favourite taste to move
And melt the mouth with what you love.
Savoury, sweet, stew'd, roast, and boil'd,
Nicely cook'd, and nothing spoil'd:
Beef to-day cures toil and trouble,
To-morrow makes nice squeak and bubble:
Ever welcome, ever winning,
Filling still, and still uncloying;
On the rump is you're beginning,
Mustard makes it most enjoying.
What's worth all beside is near you,
Take your full, nor surfeit fear you.
The many set the table in a roar,
The beef was prais'd, but venison ten times more.
The Mayor, his glee unable to contain,
Seiz'd on the haunch
To fill his paunch,
And cut and cramm'd, and cut again.
At length the fat all gone and slices best,
The pamper'd Praetor fell upon the breast.

Now let our mirth in bumpers pass,
A fuller yet, and yet a fuller glass,
The KING &mdash; now &mdash; now &mdash; distinct &mdash;asunder,
With three cheers, like a rattling peel of thunder.
Hark!  Hark!  the loyal sound!
Has rais'd the Recorder,
Who sets forth in order
The blessings of Britons around.
"A song, a song," the Toastmaster cries;
See Britannia arise,
To rule o'er the waves,
Nor shall her tars be slaves,
While sparkles do flash from their eyes.
Behold the martial band
Each a sword in their hand;
These, like veteran troops in battle they wield,
Nor undaunted do yield,
All glorious in the field,
Give the huzzas due
To our valiant crew.
Behold how they toss off their cans full of dip;
Then point, as they eager advance,
Their battering cannon 'gainst proud hostile France.
The Freemen encore with a furious applause,
And the Mayor drank a bottle in zeal for the cause.
And now is the Mace come
To lead him safely home,
When, like another hero, he knock'd the beadle down.
Once long ago,
Ere patent kitchens learnt to glow,
While taverns made the wine,
Our sires content at twelve to dine,
All stout and hale,
Could on old stingo with a pipe regale.
At length commodious Dolly came,
Inventress of the chop-house fame;
And now each wasteful cook pours spicy store,
Enlarging former luxury
With poignant sauces a season'd high,
Gives to pall'd appetite a whet unknown before.
Let turbot yield to haunch the prize,
Or haunch to turbot &mdash; whether?
Rather with happy compromise
Be both brought in together.
Your voices raise, ye Voters pure,
Still echo from the Hustings sure
Your generous Member's name.
Venison unbought to them you owe;
This blessing Corporation's know;
Who shall their wisdom blame?
Let ne'er this annual feast decline!
And may our meetings all combine
Gratitude, harmony, good cheer, and wine.
