Certes Parnassus is a loftie hille,
And bye-pathes manie a one do marke its side,
And Poets choosen anie one they wille,
Along the which on Pegasus to ride
(That lordly beaste whom everie Bard doth stride)
Unto Fame's temple, which doth stande in ken&mdash;
Ne e'en one path have Poets left untried&mdash;
And, to set forth these various ways and men,
The lowliest of the trayne doth consecrate his pen.

There once were Bards, &amp;c.

[Here follows in the MS. a long passage, which the Editor thought it necessary to omit for the sake of brevity, and which, it is hoped, the Reader will not much miss, as it relates to authors now almost obsolete.]

But as we've none of these men now,
I've said enough of them I trow,
And turn to those whose talents lie
In Hudibrastic poesy.
For many a Poet since his time
Hath copied Butler's double rhyme;
And greater Bard there is of them none,
Than he who sang of Agamemnon,
Or he who wrote, as you may read in
His Special Guide to Special Pleading&mdash;
But others oftimes when they take
Their metre, make a small mistake,
And thinking, if they use their measure,
They must be read with equal pleasure,
Forget the wit was all the time in
The men themselves, and not their rhyming&mdash;
And then besides &mdash; but, out upon it!
I'd like to have forgot the Sonnet.

Yes &mdash; there are Sonnets, and my pensive mind
Hath oft obeyed fair Sympathy's behest;
Who, with sweet Sensibility combin'd,
Hath inly nestled in my bleeding breast,
And bid me, while the beamy lines I trac'd,
Pour forth the tear that glisten'd in mine eye,
Or heave the sadden'd sympathetic sigh;
Such sigh as Rosa's bosom oft hath grac'd.
For there are Bards who touch the balmy soul
With sweet vibrations of ecstatic bliss,
And o'er congenial heart-strings gently roll,
In numbers softer than time Zephyr's kiss&mdash;
Oh!  might such beauties in my lines be seen,
But, ah! &mdash; I can no more, &mdash; or I should write fifteen.

Offe otherres too there ys noe lacke,
Who balades doe endyte;
Ytrickt and frounc'd ynne letterre blacke,
Ryghte pleasaunte toe the syghte.

Ande tellen howe some ladye fayre
A valyante knyghte dydde love,
Ande howe shee soughte bie perylles rare
His hardihode toe prove.

Orre howe some gaie and galante knyghte
A ladye's love dydde seke,
Ande howe that ladye's faderre's staffe
Thatte knyghte's thycke hedde dydde breke.

Others there are who quite disdaining metre and measure
Out Peter-Pindarize poor Peter at pleasure;
And when, by length of time and space,
What you have read you scarce can recollect,
In some unlikely place,
By close examination, you'll detect
A rhyme.

Unlike that very pretty way,
In which some poets sing or say
Some very simple harmless lay,
In Triplets.

Blest be the man from whom it sprang,
Blest be all bards who ever sang
Verses like lawyers' tails, which hang
In Triplets.

Thrice honour'd men!  may ye arrive
At due distinction while alive,
And when at last ye but survive
In Triplets,

Then may three equal sons of rhyme,
Chant forth your dirge in triple time,
While parish bells melodious chime
In Triplets.

And then there's another sweet sort of a song,
Where the lines must be smooth, for the lines must be long;
'Tis a verse which young gentlemen often indite,
When their hearts or their heads are not perfectly right.
'Tis a sweet pretty verse for a song about love,
With altars and darts and the powers above;
And it does very well when you wish "to entwine
The Myrtle of Venus with Bacchus's Vine."

But I envy most his joys,
Whom his flock alone employs,
And who, stretch'd beneath some beech,
With pen and ink within his reach,
Tells at large, in rural strains,
All "the pleasures of the plains."&mdash;
Him no anxious cares molest,
All his days are pass'd in rest;
All the company he sees,
Purling streams and shady trees,
Lowing herds and bleating flocks,
Tinkling rills, and "flow'ry rocks;"&mdash;
Oft have I, with envious wind,
Seen a shepherd thus reclin'd.

And once I saw two shepherds meet,
With each one a tear in his eye,
And each had a pipe passing sweet,
And each a black coat and a sigh.

"Ah!  Corydon, why dost thou weep?"
"Ah!  Damon, and canst thou not guess?
Come listen, ye innocent sheep,
Your looks your emotion express.

"Come hither, ye gales of the spring,
Bereft of your balmy perfume;
Come murmur around while I sing
Of beauty that died in its bloom."

Then he sang forth a strain most divine,
On a bank with sweet violets clad;
And so neatly he polish'd each line,
He seem'd to forget he was sad.

And though I had heard what he said,
Yet still I was quite in the dark,
For I knew not that Daphne was dead;
But the shepherds were sexton and clerk.

Others write Epigrams, &mdash; and why, an't please ye?
Because an epigram's so easy;
It only needs a point to shew,
And points require no parts we know.

Thus may a man, in spite of Nature's law,
That sinks the pebble and upholds the straw&mdash;
That bids the Lark, upborne on early wing,
Despise the Ass who vainly strives to sing&mdash;
That bids the gaudy Butterfly display
His painted wing, to drink the shining day,
And cautious wheel his variegated form,
To shun the foulness of his kindred worm&mdash;
That bids Leviathan his turmoil keep,
And lash the billows of the angry deep;
While the scar'd Sea-bird, startled and afraid,
Flies from the tempest which his sport has made&mdash;
That bids the Stork his airy course maintain,
While the slow Gander vibrates o'er the plain&mdash;
That bids the Camel stalk with heavy stump,
While the light Monkey skips upon his in rump&mdash;
In spite of Horace, gravity, and sense,
In spite of censure, and of friends' defence,
In spite of Criticks, and their endless quills,
In spite of Printers, and eternal bills,
Prove that a Poet, in this age of wit,
"Non semper nascitur, nonnunquam fit."
