By Drury's western side, fair Brydges-street!
Where now the busy builders daily come,
Where once the play-going crowd were wont to meet,
Rushing to Drury's or her Sister's dome;
Scenes where my youth has often joy'd to stray,
And cull the apple from the fruiterer's stall;
Let me the pleasures of thy haunts display,
Where Molly, pot-girl at the house-of-call,
Flourish'd the glowing flame of youthful bricklayers all.

O'er her fat cheek the rose had shed its bloom,
Her buxom bosom knew no stays' restraints;
O'er her thick limbs glad Health delights to roam,
And drive away vile Luxury's complaints:
Her brawny form ne'er knew consumptive faints,
Or mad hysterics, or sad spirits low;
She made no mournful groan, no sickly plaints;
Thro' rain or heat she would uncover'd go,
Shrill screaming through the echoing streets, "Pots below!"

Oft would the wearied bricklayer stay his feet,
And drink a pot within the Magpye's walls,
Toying with Molly on the pot-house seat,
Till some fresh customer for porter calls:
Then Molly flies to ply the bending drawer,
Unlocking straight the gushing frothy tide;
And slyly looking round that no one saw her,
She sucks a drop beneath the crested pride,
And then receives the pence the customer supplied,

The spell of Molly's charms did oft detain
The am'rous joiner from his hammer and nails;
And Molly's charms the blacksmith did enchain
In links far stronger than he forg'd for pails.
Drury, forsaken by her labouring train,
Soon felt the rival force of Molly's power:
Not kindling flames around her walls again,
But oft attracting at the noon-day hour
The Sons of Brick and Mortar to her boozing bower.

Oft Wyatt comes, and oft the angry Rowle,
And find the workmen from their labour fled:
Whitbread beholds with wrath-indignant soul,
The sluggish growth of Drury's infant head:
Thund'ring he turns them off, and in their stead,
From Bedford's plains a hardy race he sends&mdash;
Disbanded train-bands in their rags of red:
Each to the Magpye soon his footsteps bends,
Where beauty's influence o'er each boorish soul extends.

The more of Whitbread's porter they imbibe,
Their hearts more soften'd to the charms of Molly:
The muzzy, love-sick, ardent Bedford tribe,
Leave Drury's scaffolds in pursuit of folly.
And thus the Brewer's, hurts the Manager's trade,
The Brown Stout sells, but Drury meanwhile sleeps;
For grasping man was surely never made
To lay up wealth in multifarious heaps,
By brewing, building, spouting, patronizing sweeps.

To seek his workmen Whitbread speeds one day,
Straight to the Magpye, with indignant fury;
There he discovers at their amorous play.
The truant bricklayers from the walls of Drury.
Molly was seated on Jack Higgins' knee,
Tom Brown was off'ring her the sparkling pot:
The Manager saw their joy with raging ee;
And in his fury he had quite forgot,
That all they drank cost three-pence halfpenny per pot.

On Molly soon he pour'd his vengeance forth,
The latent Circe of the bricklayers' hod,
As from the chill blast driving from the North,
Molly stood shrinking from the demi-god.
The glittering pewter-pot which grac'd her hand,
Just for one moment caught the hero's sight:
He stands appeas'd, his passions at command;
Smiling he sees his liquor sparkling bright,
And asks the girl how many pots she sold last night.

To Southill's regions Whitbread sends the lass;
For he foresaw the mischief of her charms,
If at the Magpye bricklayer youths could pass
The day and night in Molly's circling arms.
A skullion wench, she plies the reeking clout,
And washes dishes now, instead of Pewter:
Hymen has join'd her to a rustic lout&mdash;
For none of Whitbread's livery men would suit her&mdash;
Preferring wedlock's blissful chastity in future.
