These buried ruins, now in dust forgot,
These heaps of stone the only remnants seen,&mdash;
"The Old Foundations" still they call the spot,
Which plainly tells inquiry what has been&mdash;

A time was once, though now the nettle grows
In triumph o'er each heap that swells the ground,
When they, in buildings pil'd, a Village rose,
With here a cot, and there a garden crown'd.

And here while Grandeur, with unequal share,
Perhaps maintain'd its idleness and pride
Industry's cottage rose contented there,
With scarce so much as wants of life supplied.

Mysterious cause!  still more mysterious plann'd;
(Although undoubtedly the will of Heaven:)
To think what careless and unequal hand
Metes out each portion that to man is given.

While vain Extravagance, for one alone,
Claims half the land his grandeur to maintain;
What thousands, not a rood to call their own,
Like me but labour for support in vain!

Here we see Luxury surfeit with excess;
There Want, bewailing, beg from door to door,
Still meeting sorrow where he meets success,
By lengthening Life that liv'd in vain before.

Almighty Power! &mdash; but why do I repine,
Or vainly live thy goodness to distrust?
Since Reason rules each provident design,
Whatever is must certainly be just.

Ye scenes of desolation spread around,
Prosperity to you did once belong;
And, doubtless, where these brambles claim the ground,
The glass once flow'd to hail the ranting song.

The ale-house here might stand, each hamlet's boast,
And here, where elder rich from ruin grows,
The tempting sign &mdash; but what was once is lost;
Who would be proud of what this world bestows?

How Contemplation mourns their lost decay,
To view their pride laid level with the ground;
To see, where Labour clears the soil away,
What fragments of mortality abound.

There's not a rood of land demands our toil,
There's not a foot of ground we daily tread,
But gains increase from time's devouring spoil,
But holds some fragment of the human dead.

The very Food, which for support we crave,
Claims for its share an equal portion too;
The dust of many a long-forgotten grave
Serves to manure the soil from whence it grew.

Since first these ruins fell, how chang'd the scene!
What busy, bustling mortals, now unknown,
Have come and gone, as tho' there nought had been,
Since first Oblivion call'd the spot her own.

Ye busy, bustling mortals, known before,
Of what you've done, where went, or what you see,
Of what your hopes attain'd to, (now no more,)
For everlasting lies a mystery.

Like yours, awaits for me that common lot;
'Tis mine to be of every hope bereft:
A few more years and I shall be forgot,
And not a vestige of my memory left.
