Through the lov'd haunts of thy romantic vale,
Dear KIRBY MOOR!  how often have I stray'd;
Or listening sad to legendary tale,
Or taking blithe through ev'ry op'ning glade
Primrose and cowslip; &mdash; or beneath thy shade
Reclining careless near some favourite tree,
(Whilst nature smiled in verdant robes array'd,)
Tuned my young harp to notes of artless glee,
And thus pour'd forth thy praise in wildest minstrelsy.

Hail!  goddess of this lonely Vale,
Spirit of light and beauty, hail!
Thou late wast dress'd,
In a dazzling vest,
And icicles gemm'd thy lofty crest.
But thy robe of white, &mdash; it melted away,
When young Spring shot forth her reviving ray;
And the dew-drops fell on her gentle bosom,
And the woods 'gan bud, and the wild flow'rs blossom.
And now thou art seen
In a robe of green,&mdash;
In the pride of youth and beauty's sheen.
And where is the eye that hath look'd on thee,
In the glow of thy youth, or in Winter's chill,
That hath not smiled and rejoic'd to see,
That in both thou art lovely and graceful still?
There peace reposes,
On beds of roses,
And Flora hath scatter'd her fragrant posies.
And when night hath mantled the lonely Vale,
And the moon shines forth in her lustre pale,
How sweet are the strains of the nightingale!
Oh!  never did Cynthia's virgin beam
Gild a lovelier landscape or fairer scene.
Hail!  goddess of the lonely Vale,
Spirit of light and beauty, hail!
Come from thy lone sequestered grot,
And bless with thy form this favour'd spot,
Or at thou reclined on mossy bed,
Where the violet hides its blushing head?
Or in woodbine shade,
Or in hawthorn glade,
Tell, oh!  tell me &mdash; where art thou laid?

SPIRIT.
Daring Minstrel!  would'st thou look
In nature's hidden mystic book?
Mortal eye bath ne'er beheld
Immortality unveil'd.
Where I am, &mdash; thou can'st not know;
What I am, &mdash; I dare not show,&mdash;
Listen to the whisp'ring breeze,&mdash;
'Tis my breath that fans the trees;
Look upon the blooming rose,&mdash;
'Tis my blush with which it glows;
In the violet's modest hue,
You may read my eye of blue;
In the lily's snowy grace,
My spotless purity you trace;
See the oak's majestic height,
Emblem of immortal might;
The tallest poplar's graceful stem,
Is crowned with my diadem:
Minstrel, seek no more to know,
Since the rest I dare not show;
Mortal eye hath ne'er beheld
Immortality unveiled.
