In all their pride still wave the Wharncliffe's woods,
Still o'er their bowers the summer dews descend,
In freshness flow the Don's translucent floods
High o'er whose banks the rifted rocks ascend;
Still all his hidden brooklets rippling wend
Through mossy banks, and murmur as they flow
Where pensile flowers like bashful virgins bend
To see their beauties, in the waves below,
That kiss their perfumed lips, and in their blushes glow.

But in the Riveling's solitary vale
Where all seems dead and silent save the stream,
Where no tree waves its branches in the gale,
Nor scarce a blossom woos the summer beam;
The pilgrim pauses, as the wandering dream
Of time-sepulchred years o'er memory's plain
Slowly returns .... Pursuing still the theme,
He marks the spot where once in grandeur stood
The lordly Oak, sole monarch of the solitude.

Amidst the silence and the loneliness
Of that dark valley where no leaf appears,
He stood the sovereign of the wilderness,
And flourish'd greenly, and without compeers
In strength and beauty, and adorn'd by years:
The earth his footstool &mdash; Heaven his canopy&mdash;
No Druid's rites he saw, no victim's tears;
But widely there his giant arm unfurl'd
His green and bloodless banner o'er a peaceful world.

Planted by him who waved the vengeful sword
Of Conquering William's desolating ire,
A wrath the Saxon long in vain deplored,
Amidst thy city's ruins, HALLAMSHIRE.
And so it grew unseathed by wind or fire,
The red deer's shelter, and the falcon's nest
Long wav'd it there, ev'n when the hoary sire
Told how the hand for ages had been blent
With kindred dust that rear'd that sylvan monument.

Where roll'd the confluent rivers at their base
Frowning and dark that chieftain's towers arose,
Th' embattled strength of SHEFFIELD'S earlier days,
Pride of his friends and terror of his foes:
Through many a summer's sun and winter's snows
There waved his banner ... Long those towers withstood
All that time, war, or tempest could oppose;
Till red Rebellion rear'd his standard there,
Then desolation follow'd through each future year.

In later times rose those baronial Halls
Where once the lights of feudal grandeur shone;
Amidst whose courts the winding serpent crawls,
And makes her nest within the broken throne
Where lordlings sat. &mdash; Those bowers are now o'erthrown
Where gentle hands once gather'd freshest flowers
To garland brows that should have worn a crown.
Vanish'd are these, the victims of decay,
His Oak alone remain'd, when they were pass'd away.

Ask ye what fell'd the pride of Riveling's vale?
Ask ye what laid its leafy monarch low?
'Twas not the angry spirit of the gale&mdash;
'Twas not the bolt of Heaven that dealt the blow&mdash;
Nor slow decay (though full of years) &mdash; ah no!
There is a power more fatal far than these&mdash;
See where the vale's sad Genius striking low
His viewless harp mourns its dark loneliness&mdash;
Ask there that power's fell name, &mdash; he'll say 'twas Avarice.

Peace to his shade who rear'd that goodly tree,
The once proud Castle, and the mouldering Hall&mdash;
Green let the memory of the chieftain be.
And honour'd still the name of FURNIVAL,
Let History's faithful hand withdraw the pall
That time has thrown upon the good and brave&mdash;
And let the Muse that still deplores its fall
The sacred page exultingly invoke
That bids it flourish still, the Lord's majestic Oak.
