"THE PROUD MAN'S CONTUMELY."
Imperious Mortal!  can thy pigmy soul
Treat thus the poor man for a good design?
Know, that thy ill-judg'd mandate of control
Moves but the censure of the Power Divine.
In Heav'n's esteem my blood is pure as thine,
And the creation of my sight as fair:
Yea, haply may my humble frame combine
Seeds, could they once a genial culture share,
Might life me far beyond thy misty sphere.
And shall not Poverty the license have,
With Merit, and with conscious Truth, to dare
To climb one fathom on this side the grave?
The howling wintry blasts may take their fling;
But, in due time, comes on the blushing Spring.

TO AN INFANT DAUGHTER.
Sweet blue-ey'd Cherub!  in my prayers for thee,
I have not ask'd for beauty &mdash; yet thou'rt fair;
And as for wealth &mdash; thy lot is poverty;
Nor do I wish much gold to be thy share.
May Heav'n protect thee from the villain's snare,
And give thee virtue and a prudent mind!
Long may thy cheek the rose and dimple wear,
With breath as fragrant as the vernal wind.
Oh may to thee the liberal Arts be kind!
Nor be thou Fortune's scorn so much as I!
And let thine heart to those firm precepts bind,
Which will not fail to lift the soul on high.
My Cherub!  if enough of these be given,
Thee and the rest I leave to judging Heaven.

TO A CHILD PLAYING IN A CHURCH-YARD.
Unconscious babe!  that sitt'st those graves among,
Assorting wild flowers scatter'd at thy side,
All-heedless of thy neighbour Redbreast's song,
Chanted from younder tower.  Bereft of Guide,
Oh!  couldst thou learn what ills may thee betide
In after-time; and what their woes have been
Who rest below, a monitor to Pride!
Thy little head, array'd in wreaths of green,
Would quickly ache; and thy request I ween
Would be to leave in haste this scene of strife;
Where Merit rarely finds a friend to screen,
And Knaves too amply share the sweets of life.
Foresight of good or ill thou must not know,
But, in succession, take thy joy and woe.

TO AN OAK TORN DOWN BY A STORM.
Pride of the Grove!  and art thou down at last?
Oh!  could not thy deep-rooted trunk avail
To stay the fury of the ruthless blast?
Low now thou liest; and I thy fate bewail!
No longer shalt thou brave the wintry gale,
Nor in thy branching arms and green array,
Shelter the feather'd tribes, when foes assail;
Nor strew thy russet honours in our way,
At autumn-tide.  Methinks I see the day
When he who mourns thy lot, like thee, shall fall;
Nor does the thought his stedfast soul dismay,
Taught by repeated storms to bear it all.&mdash;
Thou, prostrate tree!  shalt never more re-bloom,
But he shall rise in triumph o'er the tomb.

TO HONOUR.
Honour!  that art so seldom understood,
Say, are thine Emblems these?  the show of Pride?
The boast alone of Ancestry and Blood?
The frowns of Tyrants, who to-day may chide,
And, ere to-morrow, sink beneath the tide?
The shouts for triumphs o'er a peaceful land?
The misplaced glories which too oft abide
With such as write in blood some fell command?
Pride may exult its hour, but will not stand;
The frowning Tyrant may oppress the Poor;
Conquerors may stretch abroad the crimson'd hand,
And spread their ill-got fame from shore to shore&mdash;
But such as these are only Honour's Shame:
For, without Virtue, none deserve the name.

TIME.
'Tis Time; I feel him knocking at my heart,&mdash;
And he shall hold his unresisted sway
Till yonder Planets from their orbits start,
And this huge sepulchre, the Earth, decay.
Oh, he has clouded many a festive day
With angry feuds or jealousy's mistrust;
He strikes the blood-stained tyrant with dismay,
And buries ancient palaces in dust;
Wreathing vile weeds around the sculptur'd bust.
The mightiest dynasties before him fall,
As steel is canker'd by corrosive rust,
Or as the storm hurls down some pond'rous wall:
Yet, lo!  the Day, &mdash; the awful day of Doom
Shall bury Time, &mdash; the peopler of the tomb.
