Bright morning-star of bliss!  whose cheering ray
Shines through the mist of dark futurity,
Illumes the night of woe,
And gilds the clouds of care;

Whom shall the youthful muse, but thee, invoke?
Whom shall she sing, O beauteous Hope!  but thee?
For 'twas from thee she learnt
To sweep the golden lyre:

And, guided by thy calm and steady light,
Imagination wings his trackless way;
Soars into realms unknown,
To regions unexplored.

Thou art the pulse of Nature.  Urged by thee,
Each different member acts his little part,
Life through the system flows,
And animates the world.

Kindled by thee, the world's bright meteors blaze:
Thy magic name is on the hero's shield:
The universe itself
Is pensioned on thy smiles.

Thou art the nurse of Love.  'Twas from thy breast
The mighty cherub drank his vital strength;
'Twas thou didst wing his shafts,
And nerve his infant arm.

But thou wast nurst by Woe:  for on the hour
That gave thee birth, thy parent, Happiness,
Was wafted up to heaven,
Up to her native skies.

But thou, her legacy in Eden left
(Fair pledge, and earnest of a better world),
Wast still the friend of man;
Of fallen man the friend!

And when from Paradise an exile driven,
He silent, weeping, solitary, roamed,
Thou didst before him fly,
Didst strew his path with flowers:

And oft thy syren voice would charm his grief
(Like the sweet minstrel in the court of Saul),
And sing of promised bliss,&mdash;
An Eden in the skies.

Thy voice is like the wild Aeolian harp,
Or distant music to the listening ear,
Whose indistinctness charms,
And steals away delight.

Still in Misfortune's steps thou lov'st to tread,
And, while sweet Pity dries the mourner's tear,
To raise the drooping head,
And staunch the bleeding wound.

When life's frail vessel drinks the briny wave,
Chill penury blasts, and storms of care descend,
Anchored on thee secure,
She weathers out the storm.

The dungeon knows thy voice:  nor gates nor bars
Can Hope exclude, &mdash; the poor man's comforter,
The antidote to pain,
The conqueror of death!

For when this frame decays, and Death appears,
Reclined on thee, the sufferer breathes his last,
And on thy wings he soars
To stand before his God.

But when the night of dark mortality,
This short eclipse of being, shall be past;
When the bright morn of bliss,
Eternity, begins;

Thou, like a star, whose sweet benignant rays
Have for a time illumed the darkened world,
Shalt then extinguished fall,
And sink into the sun.
