At length emerg'd from yon opprobrious cell,
This shameful front hath met the publick eye;
At length ye fleeting scenes of life, farewell,
And close upon a wretch prepar'd to die.

What though the tide of complicated woe
Hath since the barriers firm of vice o'erborn;
What thou pent up from all that's dear below,
My grief-rent heart hath never ceas'd to mourn?

What though reflection hath a gloom o'erspread,
Oft as it trac'd unnumber'd follies past:
What though my bonds have to repentance led,
And arm'd my self-resignant soul at last:

Compunction for a wife, the friend of truth,
Whose steady heart from virtue never swerv'd,
And sad remorse for my poor children's youth,
My firmness have disarm'd, my soul unnerv'd.

O ye that throng and press to see my fall,
My latest pangs and penitence to scan,
O slight not now misfortune's latest call,
Nor shut your ears against a dying man.

Though terror-armed Justice lifts on high
Her angry rod and executive sword:
Though thoughts of death have rous'd the frequent sigh,
And oft in silence I've my fate deplor'd;

O spare my orphan babes and guiltless wife,
Suppress the tale of calumny and shame;
And let the day that robs their sire of life,
From mem'ry's tablet wipe my guilty name.

To screen from famine's too oppressive pow'r
The infant cluster that exclaim'd for bread,
I wrought a deed, O most disastrous hour,
When at affection's summons virtue fled!

With-hold not then compassion's cheering store,
I ask not for myself the precious boon;
For those, alas!  I plead who need it more,
For death shall close on me and misery soon.

Yet, yet, ye messengers of death, forbear,
One sentence more my justice would unfold;
A truth which well impatient youth might hear,
Nor less a lesson to the grave and old.

Drop not the reins of caution from your grasp,
But early quell each bold advance to vice;
Let your imprudence like the 'venon'd asp
Into the fatal snare your steps entice.

Heav'n grant my words the clouds of guilt dispel,
My fate instruct mankind this rock to fly;
And now, ye fleeting scenes of life, farewel,
Come, close upon a wretch prepar'd to die.
