Adeccobaldonoscar led the van,
And next him fought the fierce Cargolcudan.
Larpedomeskodundowalleskere
And young Zornbaxathwit brought up the rear;
Zornbaxathwit, than whom a braver youth
Ne'er grac'd the hall of Barladellercouth.
The lovely Buldermulla, when she went
Thro' Phalarama's vale to Dano's tent,
Fierce from the chace the lovely warrior spied,
His trusty greyhounds panting at his side:
Across his shoulders broad a goat he bore,
And down his limbs of strength the clotted gore
Hung by the hair, where Dano's hung before.
"O loveliest youth," fair Buldermulla cried,
"That ever crost the hills of Zanchorxide;
Fair as the mourn, when o'er Carptanto's top
She shines into the hall of Walgarzop!
O!  fairest youth, does yet an happy fair
Possess thy heart?  O loveliest youth, declare!"
Fix'd as the oak in Danderwelchin wood,
Zornbaxathwit charm'd with her beauty stood.
The goat he careless from his shoulders threw,
And cried, "O daughter of Mardancarew,
Ne'er did the harp of Oxcard, or the song
Of fair Deball, from valiant Ogzan sprung,
With sounds so charming meet my ravish'd ear
As now that charming sound I ravish'd hear.
Soon as my limbs I bathe in crystal flood,
And from them wash the goat's and Dano's blood,
In yon palm shade, behind the misty hill,
Shall we, my love, the nuptial rites fulfil?
Last morn proud Dano dar'd me to the fight,
And on Carpanto stood with dawning light.
'Zornbaxathwit!' loud as storm, he cried:
'Zornbaxathwit!" the hills and dales replied.
Fierce as a blast he thunder'd down the hill;
Fixt as a rock I in the vale stood still.
Bright as the lightning both our armours shone,
Our shields beneath our thundering falchions groan;
Our blows tho' strong the armour will not pierce;
At last I fling the hero on his &mdash;:
He with a voice like distant thunder cried,
'Don't slay me fall'n, great son of Waldarskide.'
Away my sword and giant shield I threw,
And breast to breast in equal combat flew.
The caves of Rodkir ecchoed back our noise,
The shepherds view'd us from the top of Droise!
At our fierce tramplings the high mountains shook,
The rocks were tumbled, and Carlascar's brook
Affrighted at our feet its course forsook.
At last beneath mine arm fierce Dano's head
I got &mdash; and, by my soul, I squeez'd him dead."

So spoke the youth, and pale as ashes grew
The lovely daughter of Mardancarew.
The love of Dano to her breast return'd,
And to revenge his death the Virgin burn'd.
"Give me the sword, fair Buldermulla said,
That yet with cruel Dano's blood is red."
He gave the sword:  she plung'd it in her breast,
And while the blood gush'd out made this request:
"O raise my tomb, Zornbaxathwit, she cried,
O raise my tomb by lovely Dano's side!
Then shall the hunter, as he passes by
Our moss-clad graves, say Here two lovers lie!"
