When slain the blooming hero lies
Extended on the mournful bier,
Can nature check the swelling sighs?
Streams not the fond maternal tear?
Away the stoick's boasted pride,
Which quells the passions' plenteous tide;
While apathy with dull Saturnian reign,
Damps the sweet source of pleasure and of pain.

How vain with philosophic rules
To quell the torrent of desire!
Can the rude jargon of the schools
The bright heroic act inspire?
O fool!  whose unharmonious frame,
Dumb to the voice of praise or blame,
Ne'er felt the kindling transport glow,
Nor woo'd the dazzling laurel to thy brow.

Hail to the Druid's sacred song
Rejoice!  In glorious battle slain,
The restless spirit flies e'er long
To breathe its native air again;
Again ye seize the brazen shield,
Again the gleaming faulchion wield;
In Freedom's cause again ye go,
And brave the wintry blast, the mountain snow.

Where on the heath this lonely thorn
Its rude romantic branches waves,
And moping Sadness sighs forlorn
To ocean's deep-resounding caves,
Appal'd I view the dismal scene
Where purple slaughter dy'd the green;
When curst Rebellion's impious train
Rais'd the destroying sword, and aw'd the subject plain;

When the insidious child of Rome,
Big with the schemes of future fame,
Proud and audacious, durst presume
To breathe religion's hallow'd flame;
When o'er the soul with deepest shade
Her sable pall Ambition spread;
And Vengeance red with human gore,
Impell'd by France, sought Britain's distant shore.

Swift as along the liquid skies
Sails the tremendous Bird of Jove,
O'er Albion's hoary deeps he flies;
Whilst hate and mingled fury strove
To soothe the bodings of despair.
Then Discord rais'd her horrent hair,
Aloft her meteor eye-balls glow,
Emblems of death and quick succeeding woe.

Wide o'er the land with dreadful shade
Bellona shook the flag of war,
And matrons, pale with silent dread,
Beheld th' approaching conflict near.
In vain the wise, with anxious care,
Wearied the heavens with ceaseless prayer;
Unmov'd the rigid Fates remain,
And the young soldier flew to Preston's fatal plain.

Briton, if yet thou hast a soul
Where great sensations nobly flow,
Above the dregs of earth refin'd,
Congenial to the touch of woe;
O let thy generous heart inspire
New raptures to the glowing lyre,
And teach me thro' those parts to roam,
Where soaring Genius spreads his purple plume.

Hark, thro' the night's incumbent gloom,
Dim spectres utter solemn moans;
And stretch'd on ocean's dashing foam,
The spirit of the tempest groans;
Eager before the rising sun
To see the work of death begun,
Indented lightnings cleave the air,
And growling thunders mutter from afar.

'Tis done; the clarion's echoing note
Sounds thro' the hosts the shrill alarm,
And swift the swelling clangors float,
And bid the sleeping warrior arm.
Aloud the thundering cannon roars,
Rebellowing to the rocky shores;
Erect the foaming courier flies,
And the rude throng and hovering death defies.

They fly.  I view the conqueror's sword
Wet with my country's crimson stain;
I view the bleeding soldier gor'd,
The victim of tormenting pain.
Hide, Memory, hide th' inglorious tale,
Suspend thy kind concealing veil.
Shall Freedom stoop to lawless sway,
And go where frowning power shall point the way?

Lo!  in the very jaws of fate,
And blushing for his country's shame,
A hero scorns the base retreat,
And breathes the patriot's holy flame;
O'er falling ranks his steed he guides,
While round him stream the purple tides;
And hostile hands with deep dismay
Yield to his arm the honours of the day.

But, drench'd in blood of thousands slain,
The faulchion flames with horrid glare.
Barbarian, stay! &mdash; the stroke refrain;
That venerable hero spare.
In vain imploring pity calls;
Thy fame, thy boast, O Albion!  falls.
Grimly th' insulting victor smiles,
And the base dust his hoary hairs defiles.

O Gardner!  yet thy soul sublime,
Beyond the boast of mortal praise,
Shall triumph o'er the shafts of time,
And bright to latest ages blaze:
Glory shall sound, with loud acclaim,
The trumpet of eternal fame;
Affection all the griefs reveal,
And curse th' audacious villain's impious steel.

The sister arts with rival aid,
Sweet Poesy and Painting, join,
To tell how strictest virtue sway'd,
How valour rul'd that arm divine.
And ye whom various fortune leads
To Preston's billow beaten meads,
The patriot's holy shade revere,
And o'er the turf drop soft the gushing tear.

I, wrapt in sweet poetic dreams,
Beneath this rude encircling shade,
Behold the sun's departing beams
O'er Arthur's towering summit fade;
Revolving in my pensive mind,
The various fate of human kind;
And hear the village murmurs sound from far,
Where groans of murder swell'd the clang of war.
