Hark!  hark!  a hollow voice I hear
That thrills my breast, and bids me fear!

Again my ears receive the mournful sound
Which fills the gloomy air.
It is the cry of black Despair,
Who grov'ling lies on yonder barren ground!
See, see she raves with scowling eye,
Her hair dishevell'd wildly flowing;
And as the gale increases blowing,
With naked breast she seeks to die.
Around her canker'd neck entwine
The deadly viper and the asp;
Askaunce she grins, and inward pines
With reechy hand to take the grasp!
Oft in delirium lost, she strays
To where the rocks o'erhang the deep;
And to the angry Ocean prays,
Spurning at the God of Sleep!
At night she wanders in the dell,
Defies relief, and rends her tresses,
Distracted, &mdash; agony expresses,
And shrieks aloud with hideous yell!

Oft she courts the lovers' tomb,
Cropt, alas!  in beauty's bloom.
With baleful dagger, see her stand,
Stealing wild, with outstretch'd hand
Premeditating ill:
Around she throws her pois'nous charms,
Contaminates the rill,
And calls the guiltless victim to her arms!
Aloft, in yon high bark behold her, pale
And frantic, raving as the vessel steers;
While she infects the breeze that swells the sail,
And fills the hardy veteran with fears.
Tempestuous storms at length arise,
And mount the lofty vessel to the skies;
A scene of woe! &mdash; responsive cries of dread!
The hemisphere with darkness is o'erspread;
The whistling winds the flowing canvas tear,
The masts are splinter'd, and in vain they bear
For some safe port!  she gives the dreadful shock!
All, all is gone!  they strike upon a rock!
I hear the helpless suff'rers, struggling, cry,
"Relief!  Relief!" but no relief is nigh!
Until exhausted, in the briny wave
They sink, alas, and find a wat'ry grave!

O!  where, curst Hydra, wert thou born?
What desart labour'd with thy birth?
What sent thee here, with brow forlorn,
To tear with harpy claws the Sons of Earth?
How far, thou hateful fiend, Oh!  say,
Thou'st vent thy rage?  Am I to be
A victim sure to Death and thee,
Thou foe to bliss, and mother of decay?
Wound not my breath, but haste away
To subterraneous vaults below;
There utter sounds replete with woe,
Nor more subvert the bridal day;
No more the Virgin's cheek annoy,
Nor steal the live vermillion bloom,
Nor blast at once her promis'd joy,
And lead her, frantic, to the tomb!
No more with dire pestiferous breath
Blight the fair rose that scents the dale,
Or blight the flow'rets of the vale,
Thou Messenger of Tyrant Death!
But sequester'd from the sight
Ever keep, where gloomy Night
Combines with ruthless Fate;
Where Grief, with haggard eye, deplores
Affliction's fangs, and loudly roars,
And execrates her state!
So may blest Hope's ethereal beam
Dispel the poignant misery of Care;
My heart, exulting, then may dream,
But never feel, the ranklings of Despair!
