Uprose, majestic, Phoebus' beam,
And slanting shone on Ness's stream,
Each bud reviv'd, its foliage spread,
That low the nightly dews had laid.
Forth issued from his cot the swain,
Wak'd by the matin's song on high;
Spangled with liquid gems the plain;
The water shew'd another sky;
When, lo!  the Genius of the Stream appear'd,
And shook her azure locks, and high her bosom rear'd.

She thus began, with aspect bland:&mdash;
"Pleas'd have I seen on either hand
My fav'rite spot apace adorn'd,
Though long-neglected, often scorn'd.
As views the sire a prosp'rous child,
So pleas'd have I its commerce seen,
Reformer of the rude and wild,
With buildings crowd the vacant green;
And busy Industry his weapon wield
To raise the lofty spire, or plough th' unbroken field.

"But most with joy my bosom glows,
To view yon Dome that late arose,
As Wisdom's, Learning's seat design'd,
To ope', expand, the youthful mind;
From Prejudice's eye to tear
The dark'ning veil of frequent fold,
That clownish Ignorance must wear,
Ere Knowledge yet has gain'd her hold.
And haply thus the country round regain
From Superstition vile, and all her harpy train.

"Indulging Fancy's fond presage,
I frequent scan the future age,
When forth from Academic cell,
No more immur'd from day to dwell,
In robes of various hues attir'd,
A band of youths shall straight appear,
With love of Arts and Science fir'd,
To ev'ry Art and Science dear;
And shewing fair pretence to gain the meed
Bestow'd by patriot wealth on each illustrious deed.

"With eager step oft' o'er the fields,
To view the wonders Nature yields,
Some shall attentively explore
Each subject of her ample store:
Inhabitant of earth or sky,
Or mossy dell, or wat'ry deep:
The vary'd birds that upward fly,
Or trembling reptiles low that creep,
All tacitly a moral theme afford,
Displaying wide the pow'r of Nature's Mighty Lord.

"To mend the heart, improve the man,
Intent those Attic days to scan
When first young Science came to light,
Forth issuing day through realms of night;
And cautious step by step to tread,
With searching eye, on classic ground,
Where, quiet by the mighty dead,
Long sacred held for skill profound;
The Scholar shall to Ness's side bring home
The works of ancient days, the stores of Greece and Rome.

"Enraptur'd with the Muse's song,
Reclusely from the giddy throng,
Shall some be seen to seek the bow'r
Devoted to the silent hour.
Perusing there the lays sublime
Of hoary Bard of war who sings;
Or flowing verse of modern time,
With which or grove or valley rings;
Keen inspiration sparkling in their eyes,
Anon a future Ossian, Thomson may arise.

"Now nurtur'd soon by Science' ray,
Mistaking ne'er his devious way,
Securer shall the Sailor glide
Along the wildly-waving tide;
Nor more the Merchant strive as wont,
Deluded by a thought unjust,
To shun clear Knowledge' ample fount,
Afraid her limpid stream to trust;
But wiser grown will seek its borders green,
And Commerce hand-in-hand with Learning will be seen.

"O!  long may Peace her olive wand
Benignly bear throughout the land,
Inviting still each milder art
To meliorate the humble art
And bring to arid wilds and wastes,
To rocky hills and vallies bare,
The sweets that heav'nly Science tastes,
The joys that happier climates share;
Joys, late, alas!  from milder climates flown."
She said, and sought her water-nymphs and crystal throne.
