Happy the youth, who, from disaster free,
Is sure to find in some adjoining street
A hackney coach:  he, void of envy, views
The warm surtout, nor seeks th' umbrella's shade;
But with three more (to ease the lighten'd fare)
To Opera or to Drury Lane repairs;
Where, smitten by some nymph of Cyprian race,
Who spurn'd cold Hymen for young Cupid's sake,
Sally or Susan, sweet philosophers!
Intranced he sits, and laughs at his own joke.
Meanwhile he treats with oranges and jellies,
Or fragrant leaf that crafty China yields,
Shakes his gay sides, and pours redundant forth
Double entendres, or brisk repartees.

But I, whom distant streets from coach debar,
And pocket shillingless, with Tunic vast
Or spread umbrella (as occasion suits),
Unequal shifts!  my shivering corse protect.
Then, ere I venture out, with frequent gaze
Thrust my neck forth, and stand with ears erect;
Or execrate the nimbly-pattering shower,
And idly chide th' unconscious weather glass;
Or mindful of defence, with potent grasp,
Wield the oak staff of huge circumference.
Not weightier club, nor of more pond'rous size,
Heav'd great Alcides; or th' Hibernian youth
(Sprung from thy bogs, potatoe-breeding Isle!
Famed for united energy), when he
At Baia, or salubrious springs of Tunbridge,
Charms some old widow with his rare endowments;
Or on the Steine at Brighton spreads his nets,
Well sanded Weymouth, or gay Harrowgate;
Or with some heiress scours the Northern road;
Or, Margate, on thy oft frequented coast,
When angry Neptune smooths his ruffled brow,
Eyes the slow hoy with city sportsmen fraught.

Thus while with cautious pace I steal along
Through sable allies, some obnoxious link boy,
Dingy as Lucifer, from playhouse door,
Close at my heels with hideous accent squalls.
With well dissembled care my silken hose
He seems to guard, but meditates to splash.
Conscious I halt, with frequent copper tribute
Strive to escape &mdash; in vain &mdash; alarm'd, amazed,
I cross the devious street, the phantom follows,
Officious, subtle, dauntless, and depraved.
Coaches and carts in rival racket strive
To gain the pass, oaths pass for argument,
Whips whirl above, and coach-wheels creak below.
Shrill sounds each female voice, and (tristful tale!)
My eye forgets to guard my spotless hose,
While Will o' Whisp engulphs me in the mire.
In his right hand a blazing torch he wields,
And seems the fabled ferryman of hell;
Ye Gods protect me!  guide my trembling steps,
As erst the Trojan Chief's.  Behind him steals
A specious villain, his own counterpart,
Ragged and roguish, by the vulgar call'd
A pick-pocket, whom Maia's furtive son,
With dauntless front, and fingers ever crook'd,
Has lavishly endow'd:  if he his palm
On 'kerchief, silken growth of Spitalfields,
Haply should lay, the speckled treasure flies
(As touch'd by wand of necromantic Flocton)
To Cranbourn-alley, or the Minories,
Or Jew-frequented lane, called Petticoat;
There to remain, alas!  in durance vile,
Till chance some wily Reynard of the law
Scents the rich prize, with other stolen goods,
And Townshend sets the fluttering captive free.

Beware ye walkers!  of the thief beware,
Be circumspect; oft with ferocious glance
The hungry pick-pocket peeps forth, and oft
Lies purdue in some alley's dark recess,
Prompt to despoil thee, or the lovely fair
Who grasps your proffer'd arm:  so (Ovid sings)
Huge Polypheme, when he fair Acia spy'd,
Toying with Galatea on the shore;
With double fury rolling his lone eye,
Caught the huge fragment of a living rock,
And at both lovers hurl'd the massy weight
Tremendous.  So entrench'd near Temple-bar,
Mock Auctioneer with busy hammer plies,
And calls the gaping rabble to his shop.
Young Roger, and the rural Molly May,
Guiltless of wit, just landed on the spot
Where the York waggon yields its motley store,
Amazed his gestures mark and saunter in.
Now various merchandize salutes their view,
Ribbons and laces, bodkins, pictures, glasses,
Corkscrews and candlesticks, and, "last not least,"
The silver-handled knife and fork:  with joy
The simple rustic buys the bright deceit,
When lo!  a wonder strikes his aching sense,
He paid for silver, but they gave him lead.
Sudden he storms, he raves, his curses sound
Through the high dome, but all alas!  in vain.
The 'federate crew, with frequent fists assail
His batter'd corse, and drive him to the street.

Thus pass my hours; but when black midnight's veil
The town enshrouds, and the full theatre
Spontaneous disembogues its nightly croud,
Pit, boxes, gallery, rolling in one stream;
Me, lonely walking, not the savoury treat
Of oysters, nor the Bacchanalian joys
Of tavern clubs delight.  As fall the showers,
The sloping tiles with caution I avoid;
My huge cock'd hat, which, like a Chinese roof,
O'ershadows either shoulder, rain surcharg'd,
Pours forth a double stream, till deluged o'er
I seem myself the penthouse I condemn.
Meanwhile my lungs obtest the passing hack
With clamours dissonant, my restless tongue
Sings forth like Guinea-fowl monotonous,
Prompt to surprize some vacant vehicle.
But if some distant coach salutes my ear
With grateful jumble o'er th' unequal stones,
My busy fancy calls it all my own,
And nimbly mounts th' imaginary step.
In vain &mdash; with previous haste some lucky wight
Peers with ill-favour'd visage through the casement,
While the dull driver, coat-envelop'd, laughs,
Lends the loud lash, and urges on the steed.

Thus do I trudge, from riding quite debar'd,
Nor loll at ease in some gay vis-a-vis,
Nor taste the joys of chariot, nor of coach,
Nor ev'n of wheelbarrow; disasters great!
But greater evils I prepare to sing.
My favourite shoe, with many a night has borne
Its weary master through the devious street,
With pliant firmness, and with glossy strength;
By water soak'd (what will not water soak?)
Bursts its frail seams, and sudden at the vent,
With icy blast to strike the startled sense,
Chill Eurus blows; and with fell cataract
Tumultuous, kennel water rushes in,
Portending ague, rheumatism, gout.

Thus, Laureat Pye, in thy Imperial odes,
Awhile the liquid numbers gently roll,
Floats the ambrosial gale, and zephyr bland
Fluttering aloft aetherial fragrance pours;
Aurora gayly leads the sportive hours;
The nimble-footed Graces dance the hays;
And ev'n the Muses (soften'd by thy song)
Quit their high hill for London's misty plain&mdash;
Sudden uprears thy Pegasus, intent
To mimic old Timotheus' tuneful pranks:
Bellona rushes forth with hideous din;
Blue Neptune storms, the mountain billows roll,
Fierce Aeolus unbinds the struggling winds,
And Discord claps her wings, and cries "to arms!"
'Tis Chaos all; darkness and dissonance,
Lybs, Natus, Auster, Furies, Battle, Death!
