What was the cause that fired Britannia's zeal?
O glorious cause!  to vulgar souls unknown.
What bade Britannia raise the warlike steel?
The cause of sweet Humanity alone!

'Twas Pity's voice that won her to the fight!
&mdash;Late as on Dover's chalky cliff I stood,
That white-rob'd goddess met my wand'ring sight,
Moving, with rapid step, beside the briny flood!

Around her waist an azure zone she wore;
Her floating hair she strove in vain to bind;
The high-arch'd waves roll'd foaming on the shore,
And mock'd the fury of the howling wind.

'Twas the sad fate of Gallia's banish'd train,
That led this virgin to the pebbled shore,
To mark each sail that glimmer'd on the main,
To hail each wretch, and bid him weep no more.

Mindful alone to succour and to save,
She roam'd, regardless of the angry skies;
She knew no shelter but the rocky cave,
And watch'd the tempest with unwearied eyes.

To every passing bark she wav'd her hand,
Or from her clarion rais'd a piercing sound:
I saw full many an exile reach the land!
I saw them, prostrate, kiss the saving ground!

I saw them croud around the weeping maid;
But soon she bade them from the shore retreat;
Safe on the couch their languid limbs were laid,
To seek, when morning rose, Britannia's seat.

A train of more than wonted length she led,
Of polish'd minds, and hearts of noblest deed;
Bar'd to the storm was many a hoary head,
And many a fatal wound was seen to bleed!

Oft on the way she spoke Britannia's fame,
And dwelt with transport on her liberal mind;
Styl'd her the friend of every friendless name;
The universal lover of mankind.

Pale was her cheek, and swoln her azure eyes,
When Pity chose the pensive hour of night,
To plead her children's cause with frequent sighs,
And win Britannia to the generous fight.

Britannia, seated on her rostral throne,
Receiv'd, with smiles, the heaven-descended maid;
Clasp'd to her breast, and call'd her all her own;
When thus, in fault'ring accents, Pity said:

"O thou to whom no sorrow pleads in vain!
Never, since first from smiling Heaven I came,
At once assembled such a countless train,
Undone by Fortune, to implore my name.

"From Gaul's ensanguin'd plains, a fated race!
From Murder's lifted sword these suppliants flew;
Scarce from Love's arms receiv'd the last embrace!
Scarce from their children heard the last adieu!

"In secret caves 'twas their's thro' day to weep,
'Twas their's thro' Night's dark reign, all breathless, pale,
Fleet as the winds to seek the billowy deep,
And hail, with hollow voice, each passing sail!

"Theirs each disguise inventive Fear suggests,
To bribe each bark with all their little store!
To strike, with lifted eyes, their rending breasts,
And fly, for ever, from their native shore!

"The black clouds gather'd, and the wild winds rose!
Aghast they flew along the writhing wave!
Some scap'd the storm, to meet severer woes!
Some sunk beneath it, to a watery grave.

"Whilst some, alas!  more hapless still than these!
Met the rude north-wind on its destin'd way,
And, measuring back a dreary waste of seas,
On Gallia's shores were cast, a helpless prey!

"Inhuman Gaul beheld her victim-train,
Her wretched children, with unpitying eye!
Refin'd in vengeance, snatch'd them from the main,
Dragg'd to their native homes, and bade them die!

"Still did the waves, at Mercy's ceaseless pray'r,
Guide many a fainting wretch to Albion's coast;
&mdash;Behold they kneel, and supplicate thy care,
O thou, of Europe's sons the noblest boast!"

Britannia strove in vain her pangs to hide;
Her gen'rous heart was full, and stopp'd her tongue.
She turn'd aside to weep, then, rising, cried,
"I will revenge, sweet maid!  thy childrens' wrong.

"For never, Pity!  shall thy angel voice
Pour in mine ear its tender tale in vain!
Go!  bid thy children in my arm rejoice,
My arm shall shield them on th' embattled plain."

Thus spoke th' unconquer'd Mistress of the Sea;
Then grasp'd her spear, and rais'd her massive shield;
Folded her flowing robe above her knee,
And call'd her warriors to the martial field.
