With kind console, Affliction's frown to cheer;
To wipe from Poverty the falling tear;
On wounded Virtue pour the healing balm,
And lend to Misery Compassion's arm;
His be the task whom God ordains to preach,
The poor to comfort, and the rich to teach,
To cold Despair reviving hopes to give,
And bid the pale-ey'd virgin smile and live.
Such is the parish-priest:  his duty such,
Inur'd to scenes of woe and sickness much;
Long grown familiar with disease and pains
And such the priest of Arno's happy plain.

His form fond Memory will oft pourtray:
Hoary his head by many a winter's day;
His brow unfurrow'd by the touch of care;
His breast no refuge for the fiend Despair.
Content and calm in humble peace he stood,
Meek, learned, kind, benevolent, and good.
The soft humility, the tender heart,
Long us'd to take pale Pity's fostering part;
Friend to the friendless, still relieving woe:
So you may paint an angel here below.
To him belongs no consequential air;
No solemn farce of mockery and prayer;
No look that speaks disgust; no settled frown;
No pertness, ill mistaken for renown.
A mind to ev'ry virtue form'd to cleave;
Its wish, the throbs of anguish to relieve;
Its prayers for man; its hope in God consign'd;
Its practice, charity to all mankind.
To him no pomp of many a prelate proud;
No eloquence, theatrical and loud;
He calls not Rhetoric's fastidious train
To stagger, puzzle, and confuse the brain;
He comes in love and charity to preach;
He comes to learn humility, and teach.

Aye, there he lives, beneath yon thicket's side,
Where runs in haste the riv'let's babbling tide,
Where bending beeches overarch the glade,
And hide the cottage, a nest form'd in shade,
One wand'ring pathway shews the neat abode,
Thro' woods meand'ring to the upland road;
The casement crown'd with eglantine, between,
Just gains a view &mdash; the village and the green;
And there the white-thorn, scene of many a feat,
The walk, the slope, the arbour, and the seat;
No dome is his with gay luxurious show,
That far o'erlooks the modest spire below;
No grating hinges, slowly mov'd, declare
How much unwelcome is the trav'ller there;
No iron fence to keep the poor in awe,
His latch accustom'd, at the touch, to draw
Alike to all the hospitable door,
The blind, the maim'd, the friendless, and the poor;
No surly mastiff prowls around the gate,
Lets the rich enter, bids the poor to wait;
One only spaniel, courteous all to greet,
Precedes the stranger to the fond retreat,
Barks as he goes, and, fondling all the while,
Waits to conduct him from the village stile.
Such is the man for whom our God has chose
The care of virtue and the sick man's woes;
To whom the afflicted never weep in vain,
Unheard, unsought, neglected to remain.

Unclose the door:  On yon low tatter'd bed
I see the sick man lay his languid head;
I feel the fainting pulse, I hear the sigh,
I see the pallid cheek, the closing eye;
He has no tender tie of father, friend;
No children round the bed obsequious tend;
He has no hopes on earth, content to lie,
Alone, forsaken by the world, to die.
In the deep cell, where chilling damps invade,
And dews and cold the plaister'd dungeon shade,
He lies; around him breathe no awful choir,
No organ heals, nor turns the sacred fire;
Long trains of nuns (no sad procession) there
Breathe on the dying saint an holy pray'r;
No tinkling censor rolls its fragrance round;
No painted priests adore, and kiss the ground;
No fancied angels to his sight are giv'n,
To waft the soul in ecstacy to heav'n:
Cold and appall'd he waits his coming doom,
And sees but death and terror in the tomb.

The good man comes, in voice of Pity calls,
And gilds with hope the cell's remotest walls;
Tells the sick man the path of joy to tread,
Forget the living, but adore the dead;
Points to the future heav'n in the sky;
Bids the pale wretch on Faith and Hope rely;
Shows, where the wretched will have rest he'll go;
And tells the vanity of all below.
