In youth's lovely dawn, when each season was bright,
When health in warm currents flow'd swift thro' each vein,
From morning till evening I pass'd with delight
On the green that surrounded the cot on the plain.

How pure and how cheap are the joys of our youth!
The years that succeed, how afflicted and vain!
O days of felicity, nature, and truth!
Oh, why was I forced from the cot on the plain!

What time the pale primrose just peeped from its bed,
My father one morning &mdash; Ah!  morning of pain!
Said "William!  remember to toil we were bred;
Your sports are no more round the cot on the plain.

"In youth we should guard 'gainst the wants of our age,
'Tis time you some trade or profession obtain:
Go forth &mdash; all are doom'd in life's cares to engage;
Go forth &mdash; but remember the cot on the plain!"

My sisters they wept, and my mother she sigh'd,
And I kiss'd them at parting again and again;
Then farewell to all that's endearing, I cry'd,
And oft I look'd back on the cot on the plain.

Strange faces, strange manners, and wonderful sights,
Distracted my mind, and oppress'd me with pain;
To me this strange world was no world of delights,
And I long'd to return to the cot on the plain.

I toil'd all the day, and my freedom was gone!
My cheek became pale, and my heart would complain;
No comfort I knew, but when sitting alone,
I dwelt on my joys in the cot on the plain.

At length on the world's open stage I was cast,
A poor and precarious subsistence to gain;
And ne'er ceased regretting the days that were pass'd,
When I liv'd with such ease in the cot on the plain.

At length that soft pow'r, from whom no breast is free,
Around my weak heart cast his adamant chain;
Save Lucy, no object I wish for, or see,
And never once thought of the cot on the plain.

At length she was mine, and I found myself bless'd!
Her pleasures my joy, and her sorrows my pain;
This cup of prosperity poison'd my breast,
For I look'd with contempt on the cot on the plain.

My table I spread, and I liv'd in such stile,
That wealth, pomp, and luxury soon turn'd my brain;
I deem'd all my former companions too vile,
And blush'd e'en to think of the cot on the plain.

Presumptuous, I dar'd e'en misfortune defy!
But who can avert what the fates may ordain?
My Lucy she droop'd!  and I saw her soon die!
And could I then think of the cot on the plain?

With her pass'd away all the means of delight!
The lands which she brought were demanded again!
The prospect before me was gloomy as night,
Except a faint ray from the cot on the plain.

My dream of felicity now was no more!
'Twas now like beginning my fortune again;
Like launching an old batter'd bark from the shore,
To brave all the storms and the rocks of the main.

'Twas now that, reflecting on all that had pass'd,
I compar'd each short bliss with each lingering pain;
Resolv'd to return to contentment at last,
And dwell with sweet peace in the cot on the plain.
