Once more the hum of Commerce fills the port,
Her mingled colours greet the morning beam;
Innumerous sails the vernal breezes court,
And anchoring navies grace the azure stream.

The flag of Britain, on the mast unfurl'd,
Waves proud defiance to the Gallic mound,
Where fell ambition, that would grasp the world,
Roars, like a lion, to the forest bound.

Yet safer bound, if rumour do not lie,
By beauty's spells th' Imperial victor's charm'd
To drink soft pity from his AUSTRIA'S eye,
To gaze &mdash; 'till vengeful passions are disarm'd!

As JUNO, with the Cyprian cestus, wrought
A change, unhop'd for, in the Thunderer's mind;
By love subdu'd, her sympathies he caught,
And war eternal for her smiles resign'd!

How chang'd the period!  on this level strand
Since mighty Caesar from his galley sprung;
Whose light keels freighted with the legion-band,
No danger met the treacherous shoals among.

These undefended shores how long a prey
To northern hordes, for richer fields athirst!
'Till ALFRED'S genius guarded every bay,
To Freedom's region barr'd their feet accurst!

Hail, patriot father of BRITANNIA'S boast;
In war, her bolt!  ambassadors in peace!
Thy fleets still reap the growth of every coast,
Bear home its wealth, and bid contention cease!

From thee a race of naval heroes climb,
Adorn'd of old, by DRAKE and RALEIGH'S name;
The climax rising with applauded time
'Till NELSON'S labours stamp'd the book of fame!

And well their country may devotion ask,
Who knows their daring service to repay;
T' ennoble life, a sovereign's power to task;
In death, a public tomb, and grateful lay!

Tell from thy urn, great victor of the Nile!
O tell, if conscious of distress on earth,
Thy COLLINGWOOD, whose spirit seeks our isle,
The lot reserv'd for partners of thy worth!

Nor to the higher class the meed confin'd&mdash;
I love to muse, and trace it to the crowd
Of humbler tenants to the grave consign'd,
Which, from the church-yard, challenge praise aloud.

From every sod the voice of valour calls,
On every stone its character imprest;
While manly sympathy for him that falls
Proclaims the virtues of the seaman's breast.

Tho' absent here the mausoleum form,
The charm of numbers, and the sculptor's art,
Th' inscription runs, with Nature's language warm,
Th' unquestion'd tribute of the honest heart!

Ye gen'rous sons of ocean's rugged strain!
How sweet to thought the healing you bestow:
These just memorials of your comrades slain,
From kindred cheeks shall chase the tear of woe.

Slain at the station by his country given,
Indifferent what his place in glory's roll,
The seaman's spirit seals his pass to heaven,
Undeck'd with rank, who boasts a SYDNEY'S soul!

Still sweet the thought!  from this sand-girded shore,
From GOODWIN'S fair domains by Neptune torn,
That shipwreck'd wretches, by the hardy oar
Of Kentish veterans erst to safety borne:

Or anxious voyager, whose sanguine zeal
Already clasps his fair in love's embrace,
When morn unfolds the welcome sails of DEAL,
May, honour'd, here their brave deliverers trace!

When noon invites to seek the shaded walk,
Here oft his comrades shall the tomb survey,
Rais'd by their bounty, of his deeds to talk,
And mourn the fortunes of the mouldering clay.

And oft at eve, by pedagogue dismiss'd,
The vagrant boy shall ramble thro' these bounds,
At times, inspir'd, to emulation list,
Or start in fancy, at sepulchral sounds!

To him these ruins shall instruction preach&mdash;
The pointless spire speak man's unfailing doom;
The broken column, vanity impeach,
That looks for no reward beyond the tomb!

By him this useful lesson shall be drawn,
His country claims his talents and his days;
To seek distinction still where dangers yawn,
In death, to merit his associates' praise!
