RECITATIVE.
'Twas at a house where City wits repair,
To talk and taste tobacco-tainted air,
Six social souls one ev'ning lately met,
To drain their pockets and their whistles wet,
To laugh and joke, to tell the merry tale,
And drown the tyrant Care in Burton ale;
For, tho' they all from diff'rent places came,
Yet their intentions nearly were the same.
The glass had circled twice, and seem'd to say,
Mirth uncontroul'd should hold her easy sway;
When they resolv'd, their pleasure to prolong,
That each should praise the liquor in a song;
And they who dar'd this rule to disobey,
Should all the reck'ning of the ev'ning pay;
But he who sang, and prais'd the liquor best,
Should, in reward, be treated by the rest.
Phelim O'Flannaghan from Londonderry,
Whose rule thro' life is always to be merry,
As 'twas to him they ow'd the social plan,
Embrac'd the offer first, and thus began:

AIR &mdash; "Langolee."
Of the hill of Parnassus some poets will tell us,
And Helcion fountains, a roundabout tale;
Believe me, they're nothing but poor wat'ry fellows,
For poets there's nothing like good Burton ale.
O Burton ale!  it sparkles so prettily,
Makes one keep rhyming and singing so wittily,
Not all the flip-flops from your France, Spain, or Italy,
Can equal, for poets, your good Burton ale.

Let them drink till they burst of their Hippocrene waters,
And then at my poems and me let them rail;
Let them hang up Apollo and all his Nine Daughters,
Give me but a bumper of good Burton ale.
O Burton ale!  &amp;c. &amp;c.

Should misfortune o'ertake you, and rob you of freedom,
And lay you as dead as a herring in jail,
Your friends and your money no more you will need 'em,
If you drink pretty freely of good Burton ale.
O Burton ale!  it sparkles so prettily,
It makes one keep rhyming and singing so wittily,
There's nothing in Ireland, in France, Spain or Italy,
Sparkles so bright as good Burton ale.

O!  yes &mdash; there is something, it was my mistaking,
A something I better than any thing prize;
A something much brighter than waht I've been spaking,
'Tis the sparkling of Norah Brulgruddery's eyes.
O Norah's black eyes!  they sparkle so prettily,
She kisses so sweet, and her tongue wags so wittily,
Not all the stage-dancers from France, Spain, or Italy,
Can equal my Norah's two pretty black eyes.

RECITATIVE.
Sawny M'Grouther, a douce honest chiel,
Wha kens the art o' thriving unco weil,
Wi' head pang'd fu' o' learning frae the College;
Attempted next its virtues to acknowledge.

AIR &mdash; "John Anderson my Joe."
'Tis I hae been frae north to south,
And mony fairlies seen,
And never fail'd to slack my drouth,
In ilka place I've been:
I've wander'd mony a weary mile,
O'er mountain, muir, and dale,
But never met the like o' thee,
O charming Burton ale!

How sweet are roses newly blawn!
And sweet the new mown hay,
How sweet to prie my Meggie's mou!
And sweet the dawn o' day.
How sweet, when rumbling is our kite,
On haggis to regale!
But ah!  much sweeter than all these
Is charming Burton ale.

O Edinbro'!  you maun give way,
Tho' lang ye've born the grie,
And Ferntosh itsell maun yield,
O Burton ale!  to thee.
To tell thy wonder-working power,
I fear my tongue will fail,
Then quickly let me prove thy praise,
O charming Burton ale!

RECITATIVE.
Next Monsieur Rigadoon, who came from France,
To teach de English ladies how to dance;
Like ev'ry Frenchman, always pleas'd and gay,
He thus commenc'd the panegyrick lay:

AIR &mdash; "Contre les Chagrins de la Vie."
Vonce me thought me lov'd de Champaign,
And les autres forte de vine;
But now Port, Champaign, and Claret,
Me for ever will resign.
Me be grown much more sensible,
Since to England me did sail;
Me have seen de English ladies;
Me have tasted Burton ale.

Vell may le grand Bonaparte,
Vish dis contree to invade;
Not because he'll find de money,
Or because he'll spoil deir trade:
Not because he love de freedom,
Vich in England so prevail;
But, vat Frenchman love much better,
He vill find the Burton ale.

Le Duchman may smoke le tabac,
Et le German prize sour krout,
Le Grand Turque may drink le caffe,
Et le Russien feel the knout:
But let me, von pauvre Frenchman,
Always vid John Bull regale;
Let me eat de English roast beef;
Let me drink de Burton ale.

RECITATIVE.
Next Mr. Bull, an Englishman, who bore
A pond'rous paunch which swinging hung before,
Harmoniously his voice began to raise,
And join his neighbours in the liquor's praise.

AIR &mdash; "Sally in our Alley."
When toss'd upon the sea of life,
By adverse fortune's gale, Sir,
You unconcern'd may view the strife,
Well lin'd with Burton ale, Sir.
It fills the heart with true delight,
And drowns all care and trouble;
It even will improve our sight,
Nay, make us oft see double.

Tho' Grub-street I cannot excel,
Or yet for Braham pass, Sir;
To prove I like my subject well,
Pray but observe my glass, Sir;
And if one proof will not suffice,
And all my words are vain, Sir;
To make it clear I speak not lies,
I'll do the trick again, Sir.

Altho' you find my Muse is frail,
I must not quite forget her;
For had she tasted Burton ale,
She would have sung much better.
In vain I eloquently strove
To argue or to hector;
For, by an odd decree of Jove,
Poor wench!  she must drink nectar.

RECITATIVE.
Of all the company but one remains,
To sing the liquor in harmonic strains;
And that was one who never Mirth disowns;
So thus sang honest Mister Jenkin Jones:

AIR &mdash; "By the Side of a Brig."
Hur sprang from hur anshester Owen Glentour,
A prince of great honour and fame;
Hur relations are shentlemen all to this hour,
And Shinkin ap Shones is hur name.
Yet hur father, hur honesty owns,
Keeps mead and metheglin for sale;
But the mead of hur own father Shones
Is not equal to goot Purton ale.
Good Purton ale, &amp;c.

Hur comes from Llangollen, Got pless hur!
A pretty and prave little place;
And, as long as hur life shall possess hur,
Hur will not Llangollen disgrace.
Yet this truth hur most honestly owns,
That in all hur Llangollen vale,
There is nothing, pelieve Shinkin Shones,
Can equal this goot Purton ale.
Goot Purton ale, &amp;c. &amp;c.

RECITATIVE.
Here honest Shenkin fell beneath the table,
For to sing more that night hur was not able;
And yet it was decreed, with loud applause,
Hur prais'd the liquor most by "falling" in its cause.
