Let those on whom the virtuous-minded Muse
Ne'er breath'd a portion of her hallow'd fire,
The sordid paths of vice and folly choose,
And to mean subjects smite the tinkling wire.

If aught to me of that blest art is giv'n,
To wake to pleasing melody the string,
Be mine the task, in gratitude to Heav'n,
Of deeds, which Heav'n applausive marks, to sing.

O!  godlike skill!  important gift to man,
The dying speech to kindle &mdash; to restore&mdash;
Add length'ning years to life's contracted span,
Amaz'd we stand!  admire!  give thanks &mdash; adore.

Say, HAWES, whence did the bright idea rise?
Whence flow'd the great, the comprehensive thought?
Combining skill profound with judgment wise,
By patient practice to perfection brought?

Perchance, whilst sinking in the rav'nous stream
Some bloated corpse breath'd forth its finer part,
To thee, by Heaven sent, on Mercy's beam
It came, and with the blessing fill'd thy heart.

Yet what avails to seek from whence it flow'd,
Enough it is for Piety to scan,
With grateful heart, th' indigent hand of God
Reveal'd in kindness to his favour'd man.

Long may the tree, which thou hast planted, thrive;
O'er all the land its friendly branches shoot;
Soon to its rightful dignity arrive,
And deeper daily pierce its delving root!

The son of wealth, to save a worthless name,
In vain the lofty monument would raise,
In vain he strives to buy an unearn'd fame,
With costly sculpture and with venal lays.

The figur'd marble, faithless to its trust,
To Time's corrosive tooth shall fall a prey;
Shall sink slow mould'ring into common dust,
And by oblivion's streams be wash'd away.

But thou a more substantial fame shall prove
Than gaudy tombs or venal lays can give;
Built on the base of every good man's love,
Thy praise to time's remotest hour shall live.

And lo!  fair Virtue spreads her ample page,
Where stands, inscrib'd in characters of gold,
Each worthy's name, of ev'ry clime and age,
By sacred truth's unerring pen enroll'd.

There, where her HOWARD'S name so long has shone,
Pre-eminent in Charity's blest cause,
By equi-lustrous rays of glory known,
Pleas'd we behold the honour'd name of HAWES.
