I.
"Despair has seiz'd th' intrusive king;
Ruin'd is the invader's host:
Th' imperial eagle's glittering wing
On Pyrenean heights is lost:

"In vain he eyes the Garonne's trembling wave,
Disarm'd and vanquish'd by his guilty fears.
The fugitive not e'en Napoleon's arm can save
From Lusitania's curse, and sad Iberia's tears."

Such are the sounds which stir the tyrant's rage&mdash;
Vain all the splendour Dresden's court bestows;
The rising tumult Berthier can't assuage,
Nor Austria check the torrent of his woes.
The stoutest warrior in his circling train
May shout to arms, and couch his quivering lance in vain.

Where Biscay's surges lash the mountain's base,
Whose summit scarce upholds th' incumbent skies,
A minstrel from the slaughter of his race
Turn'd to Vittoria's field his streaming eyes;
His hands prophetic chasp'd the golden lyre,
Where notes to distant Gades spreads the Patriot's fire.

II.
Hear ye the groans from Castra's streets,
Still echoing thro' the hills!
Madrid with anguish loud repeats,
The story of her ills!

On Saragossa's towers are yet display'd
Th' insulting banners of our cruel foes:
To Tarragona's sons is yet unpaid
The debt of vengeance for their murder'd parents' woes.

Romana's spirit from the tomb arise!
As from the Baltic erst the patriot dew:
His image present to the soldier's eyes,
Of chivalry the ardour shall renew.
Thy shade, brave Palafox!  for vengeance stays,
Loudly it calls, and Spain the call obeys.

Castanos!  Mina!  Longa!  at the voice,
O'er yielding traitors then red faulchions wave;
Yon valiant chiefs my bleeding heart rejoice,
Their country's sinking honour born to save.
I see their efforts on Vittoria's plain,
Now on the flying Gaul they wreak the ills of Spain.

III.
Of ancient days the scenes unfold!
Beside that stream the heroes fought,
Led by a sable warrior bold
Whom Ocean to Iberia brought.

France fled before the sea-born Briton's spear,
Her vine-clad regions felt the deadly stroke,
The Garonne own'd illustrious Edward's heir,
Poictiers a monarch bent beneath his yoke.

Spain knew the sires of yon advancing host,
Whose manly strides the glorious pass pursue,
Trac'd by Plantagenet on yonder host,
Where Bayonne's towers already meet their view,
Britons strike home &mdash; to end Iberia's wrongs,
Protracted war her mis'ry prolongs.

What minstrel's hand can touch the sounding lyre,
Victorious Wellington!  to reach thy praise,
A Pindar's muse thy matchless deeds require,
Yet gratitude her humble voice will raise;
Nor thou, great chief!  the tribute wilt despise,
In raptures bursting from a nation's eyes.

IV.
Long Iberia's bosom bled,
Pierc'd by treason's venom'd dart:
Hope, the wretch's saviour, fled
From the stout Castilian's heart.

Her princes captives, and her nobles chain'd,
Gigantic pow'r bestrode the falling state,
Till Wellington her sacred cause maintain'd,
And taught her to defy the tyrant's utmost hate.

Europe no more thy hopes of peace suppress,
Tho' long beneath the Gaul's dominion bent;
Kind Heaven the wrongs of freedom to redress,
The Wellington from Britain hither sent.
Batavians, Saxons, Swiss, Hesperians see,
Spain, from destruction sav'd, bids you alike be free.

Sarmatia, too, has dar'd extend her spear
To drive Napoleon from her ample plain,
Disarm'd and vanquish'd by his guilty fear,
He lives surviving his brave soldiers slain.
Kindled by Wellington on Torres Vedrashills,
The spreading flame of Liberty all Europe fills.

V.
Prince of Britain's sister isles!
Lord of Ocean's utmost wave!
Europe's peace hangs on thy smiles;
Britons conquer but to save.

What high renown attends thy honour'd name,
Who to exhausted nations peace shall give!
While tuneful minstrels sing thy deathless fame,
Thy memory in the grateful hearts of kings shall live.

What midnight vision from beside the Thames
Relieves the minstrel's eyes of carnage tir'd?
From countless stars I watch the silver beams,
And list where music's notes, with joy inspir'd,
Announce the festival &mdash; Great George commands,
To honour Wellington, and his victorious bands!

The brilliant scenes by beauty's presence crown'd;
There princes, peers, and warriors shine:
There flaming Patriotism and wealth abound,
All emulous in choral sounds to join.
May Europe share the bliss of liberated Span,
And Wellington immortalize his Prince's reign!
