The twinkling stars announce the close of day,
And darkness gathers underneath our lee;
From toil the weary sailors haste away,
And leave the deck to solitude and me.

No sunbeam now illumes the trembling surge;
And all the ship a solemn stillness holds,
Save where the helmsman chants an artless dirge,
Or vigil hoarse the lapse of time unfolds.

Beneath my feet (while Night extends her shade),
Lull'd in the motion of the rolling deep
(Each in his narrow hammock closely laid),
The sons of Neptune share refreshing sleep.

As slow I pace, remembrance brings to mind
The early fate of many a seaman brave;
Whose mould'ring relics, suddenly consign'd
To dark oblivion, rest below the wave.

These hear the boatswain's busy call no more,
Nor climb the mast, our hoist aloft the sail;
No longer listen to the billow's roar,
Or spread the swelling canvas to the gale.

These filial love no more, alas!  shall greet,
No conjugal affection thee salute;
No child shall haste their wish'd return to meet;
No wife enjoy their honest labour's fruit.

For these the tender gush of grief has flow'd
Down many an anxious parent's furrow'd cheek;
The widow fainted under mis'ry's load,
And sireless orphans wept with sorrow meek.

Their daring souls dlsdain'd a foreign yoke;
The Gallic flag oft yielded to their might.
How bent the Hollanders beneath their stroke?
How haughty Spaniards felt their force in fight?

Ye lordlings!  slight not these with scornful thought,
Because in lowly rank they liv'd and died.
Since by their valour your defence was wrought,
And by their toil your luxury supplied.

The highest state, the pinnacle of pow'r,
Affords no shelter from the stroke of Death;
Reflect, that one inevitable hour
Alike deprives the prince and slave of breath!

The hardy tar unnumber'd perils wait;
Vain all that skill or valour can perform!
In many a shape he meets the stroke of fate,
Victim to hunger, fight, disease, or storm.

Ev'n now, perhaps, beneath us, as we pass,
The bones of many a valiant sea-man lie:
Whose gen'rous heart had grac'd superior class,
Whose daring hand had honour'd station high.

But merited promotion from their aim,
Was constantly withheld by adverse chance:
The want of int'rest still obscur'd their fame,
And lack of friends still thwarted their advance.

Full many an hero (though of common rank)
In ocean's breast has found a wat'ry tomb:
Who still the draught of disappointment drank,
And spent in toil and strife meridian bloom.

Some humble Nelson, that (had Fortune smil'd)
With great Trafalgar's victor might have vied;
Some Duncan brave (though not in peerage styl'd):
Some undistinguish'd Hawke may here abide.

To wear the glitt'ring badges of command,
And order culprits to the stripe at will;
To reap vast prizes by the lucky brand,
Each, mod'rate wish sufficient to fulfil;

Their lot forbade:  nor only barr'd the train
From wealth and sway, but often sav'd from guilt:
None of their tyranny could e'er complain,
No blood (except the foe's) by them was spilt.

Not their's the sateless thirst of sordid ore!
Not theirs of hypocrites unveil'd the shame!
Not their's the evils of unlawful store!
Or gnawing consciousness of hidden blame!

Within the wonted space of naval scenes
Their humble hopes and wishes still were bound:
Content on board they work'd to earn the means
Of future competence on British ground.

Yet, though no mark denote their place of rest,
No short inscription tell their name and date;
Yet many a relative in mournful breast
Preserves the sad remembrance of their fate.

When the ripe ears the sickle's aid require,
Loquacious reapers oft beguile their toil
By long account of brother, son, or sire,
Who perish'd distant from their native soil.

When winter's howling storms their rage display,
And round each blazing hearth the peasants throng,
The seaman's deeds, who died when far away,
Are still the theme of story or of song.

For who e'er ventur'd on the main to roam?
And brav'd the chance of storm or hostile ball?
Reckless of welcome at return to home,
Or hopeless of a tear, if doom'd to fall.

In his last pang, by this suggestion mov'd,
The death-struck sailor yields his passing soul:
Expiring he reflects on those he lov'd,
And seems to take the tribute of their dole.

But if (surviving many a bold compeer)
He reach the land for which he toil'd and fought;
With rapture clasp'd to many a bosom dear,
He shares a joy beyond the reach of thought.

There, at the foot of that aspiring tree,
Whose boughs erst nodded o'er his infant sport,
His listless frame, from care and sorrow free,
At noon-tide hour may gentler slumber court.

If maim'd, or blind, or crippled, he return,
His grateful country will not aid deny:
With ardent zeal the hearts of Britons burn,
To sooth his troubles, and to grant supply.

For thee (who pourest forth this artless strain)
The destiny that waits is yet unknown;
Perhaps &mdash; to perish on the stormy main!
Perhaps &mdash; at home to rest beneath a stone!

Welcome be either doom, if conscience clear
Yield hope of future bliss, and fear expel;
Yet (if on earth thy corse should find a bier)
Some frail memorial thus perhaps may tell:&mdash;

EPITAPH.
Here on Earth's bosom rests a son of grief,
Whose early prospects once were bright and gay;
But Fortune frown'd!  no friends bestow'd relief!
And disappointment mark'd him for her prey!

Yet through life's stormy scene unwreck'd he sail'd;
Nor felt the gripe of poverty and want:
For constant industry and toil avail'd
Of food and raiment to procure the grant.

He still refrain'd from censure and from praise,
Unblam'd and unapplauded let him bide!
Till the great Judge of all the dead shall raise,
And justly their eternal lot decide.
