Dear dream, which I must ne'er behold fulfill'd,
Thou beamy form, more fair than orient day,
Float back and hover yet
Before my swimming sight.

Do they wear crowns in vain, that they forbear
To realize the heavenly portraiture?
Shall marble hearse them all,
Ere the bright change be wrought?

Hail, chosen ruler of a freer world!
For thee shall bloom the never-fading song&mdash;
Who bid'st it be!  To thee
Religion's honours rise.

Yes &mdash; could the grave allow &mdash; of thee I'd sing:
For once would Inspiration string the lyre&mdash;
The streaming tide of joy,
My pledge for loftier verse.

Great is thy deed, my wish.  He has not known
What 'tis to melt in bliss, who never felt
Devotion's raptures rise
On sacred music's wing:

Ne'er sweetly trembled, when adoring choirs
Mingle their hallow'd songs of solemn praise;
And, at each aweful pause,
The unseen choirs above.

Long float around my forehead, blissful dream!
I hear a Christian people hymn their God,
And thousands kneel at once,
Jehovah, Lord, to thee.

The people sing their Saviour, sing the Son;
Their simple song according with the heart,
Yet lofty, such as lifts
Th' aspiring soul from earth.

On the rais'd eye-lash, on the burning cheek,
The young tear quivers; for they view the goal
Where shines the golden crown,
Where angels wave the palm.

Hush!  the clear song swells forth.  Now flows along
Music, as if pour'd artless from the breast;
For so the master will'd
To lead its channel'd course.

Deep, strong, it seizes on the feeling heart,
Scorning what knows not to call down the tear,
Or shroud the soul in gloom,
Or steep in holy awe.

Borne on the deep slow sounds, a holy awe
Descends.  Alternate voices sweep the dome,
Then blend their choral force,
The theme, Impending doom.

Or the triumphal Hail to him, who rose;
While all the host of heaven, o'er Sion's hill
Hover'd, and, praising, saw
Ascend the Lord of Life.

One voice alone, one harp alone, begins;
But soon joins in the ever-fuller choir.
The people quake.  They feel
A glow of heavenly fire.

Joy!  Joy!  they scarce support it.  Rolls aloud
The organ's thunder &mdash; now more loud, and more&mdash;
And to the shout of all,
The temple trembles too!

Enough!  I sink.  The wave of people bows
Before the altar &mdash; bows the front to earth;
Devoutly, deeply, still.

One day, when rest my bones beside a fane,
Where thus assembl'd worshippers adore,
The conscious grave shall heave,
Its flow'rets sweeter bloom;

And on the morn that from the rock He sprang,
When panting praise pursues his radiant way,
I'll hear, &mdash; He rose again&mdash;
Shall vibrate from the tomb.
