Mark where yon steeple rears its simple spire,
Where all the village train, with awe, retire,
To lift their grateful orisons on high,
To him, whose awful mandate rules the sky.
I love to see the long procession glide
Across the mead, or up the green-hill's side,
To that plain edifice, whose folding-door
Expands admissible to rich and poor:
The house of HIM, who no distinction knows,
But that which Virtue's sacred pow'r bestows.
Behind the church a tott'ring mansion bends,
Whose mould'ring wall a sudden lapse portends;
Rank weeds enclose its entrance; and each stone
Is with excrescent damps and moss o'ergrown:
Its garden waste, its lawn o'er-run with briar;
Its once pellucid fount, a bed of mire.
There desolation reigns &mdash; no human sound
The long deserted lonely rooms resound:
No guest, with champing steed and hasty hoof,
Approaches now the hospitable roof;
That rifted roof, wide opening to the sky;
Totters at every blast that blusters by.

Alas!  the Parsonage! &mdash; "Alas!  the shame"&mdash;
Methinks I hear some hoary swain exclaim,
"A time there was, when yonder mould'ring dome
Was Peace and Charity's selected home.
How cheerful to the eye its front arose!
There crept the Woodbine, and here bloom'd the Rose.
There droop'd the virgin Lily's pensive head;
And here Carnations glow'd with streaky red.
There stood of ancient Elms a stately row,
And here, as gently slop'd the smiling lawn,
Started at ev'ry breeze, the trembling Fawn.
Methinks, ev'n now, in yon sequester'd way,
Where hazel clumps exclude the noon-tide ray,
Our lost lamented past'ral friend I view,
As wont, some pious reverie pursue.
O!  what a man was he? &mdash; what charms of sense
Could round such tranquil happiness dispense.
Each sun, that on his works delightful shone,
Saw him neglect, for others' ease, his own:
Each lib'ral sentiment that warm'd his breast,
A friend in ev'ry human form confest:
No narrow selfish prejudice confin'd,
His noble, free, disinterested mind.
To ev'ry sect alike his bounty flow'd;
His love for all mankind unceasing glow'd;
For as the sun its genial warmth imparts,
Alike to barren and to fertile parts,
So would he dedicate to all his care,
And portion of his love to all a share:
Good, without pride; and learn'd, without conceit;
Skill'd to check riot, or suppress debate;
No match declar'd &mdash; no contract was begun,
Nor mother gave her maid, nor sire his son;
Till first their past'ral Friend the choice approv'd;
His sanction was the prize for those that lov'd.
Beneath his care dark Melancholy smil'd,
By soothing arguments of woe beguil'd:
Despair grew calm, and Sorrow's rankling dart
Was blunted by his soft persuasive art.
The wretch by persecuting Conscience stung
Drank Peace and Hope from his enliv'ning tongue;
That tongue whose harmonizing sounds would flow
A magic talisman for ev'ry woe.

"Alas!  one fatal eve, by duty led,
He sought with godly zeal the fev'rish bed
Of fell disease &mdash; he sought to cheer the hour
Of harpy Death's inevitable pow'r;
But can my falt'ring voice our mis'ry tell?
A victim to his gen'rous pains he fell;
He fell (but rests in ev'ry heart inurn'd)
Wet with the tears of all; belov'd and mourn'd!

"Ah!  sad reverse &mdash; a stripling of the gown
Now holds the vicarage, but lives in town.
In scenes of gay volupt'ousness he strays,
And spends in revelry both nights and days.
While yonder dome, slow mould'ring into dust,
Admits each pelting show'r and vagrant gust."

Methinks I hear the swain &mdash; his deep-drawn sigh!
I mark the rising sorrow swell his eye;
And as I bid farewell, and turn the vale,
Reflection ponders on his mournful tale.
