Fair is the majesty of all thy works,
On the green earth, O mother Nature&mdash;
But fairer the glad face
Enraptur'd with their view.
Come from the vine-banks of the glittering lake&mdash;
Or &mdash; hast thou climb'd the smiling skies anew&mdash;
Come on the roseate tip
Of evening's breezy wing,
And teach my song with glee of youth to glow!
Sweet Joy, like thee &mdash; with glee of shouting youths,
Or feeling Fanny's laugh.

Behind us far &mdash; already Uto lay,
At whose foot Zuric, in the quiet vale,
Feeds her free sons:  behind&mdash;
Receding vine-clad hills.
Unclouded beam'd the top of silver Alps;
And warmer beat the heart of gazing youths,
And warmer to their fair
Companions spoke its glow.
And Haller's Doris sang &mdash; the pride of song,
And Hirzel's Daphne, dear to Kleist and Gleim,
And we youths sang, and felt,
As were each &mdash; Hagedorn.

Soon the green meadow took us to the cool
And shadowy forest, which becrowns the isle:
Then cam'st thou, Joy, thou cam'st
Down in full tide to us;
Yes, goddess Joy!  thyself; we felt, we clasp'd thee,
Best sister of Humanity, thyself;
With thy dear Innocence
Accompanied, thyself.
Sweet is, O chearful Spring!  thy inspiring breath,
When the meads cradle thee, and thy soft airs
Into the hearts of youths
And hearts of virgins glide.
Thou makest Feeling conqueror.  Ah!  thro' thee
Fairer, more tremulous, heaves each blooming breast;
With lips spell-freed by thee
Young Love unfaltering pleads.

Fair gleams the wine, when to the social change
Of thought or heart-felt pleasure it invites;
And the Socratic cup,
With dewy roses bound,
Sheds through the bosom bliss, and wakes resolves,
Such as the drunkard knows not, proud resolves,
Emboldening to despise
Whate'er the sage disowns.
Delightful thrills against the panting heart
Fame's silver voice &mdash; and Immortality
Is a great thought, well worth
The toil of noble men.

By dint of song, to live through after-times&mdash;
Often to be with rapture's thanking tone
By name invok'd aloud,
From the mute grave invok'd&mdash;
To form the pliant heart of sons unborn&mdash;
To plant thee, Love!  thee, holy Virtue!  there,
Gold-heaper, is well worth
The toil of noble men.
But sweeter, fairer, more delightful 'tis
On a friend's arm to know one's-self a friend!
Nor is the hour so blest
Unworthy heaven itself.

Full of affection, in the airy shades
Of the dim forest, and with downcast look
Fix'd on the silver wave,
I breath'd this pious wish:
"O were ye here!  who love me tho' afar,
Whom singly scatter'd in our country's lap,
In lucky hallow'd hour
My seeking bosom found,
Here would we build us huts of friendship, here
Together dwell for ever!"  The dim wood
A shadowy temple seem'd;
The vale, Elysium.
