'Tis now the pensive hour of early night!
The moon-beam glistens on the passing wave!
Around the bat revolves his whirling flight;
And watch-words hoarsely break a silence of the grave.

Save where in feeble gusts the hollow wind
Bears to the heart the seaman's hollow cry!
And hark!  (sweet music to the wistful mind!)
The distant plaintive chimes in solemn pauses die.

Hapless the day, when fraught with cruel speed
Relentless fate the warrior's eyelids clos'd!
Unknown, unwail'd he fell; and doom'd to bleed,
Far from the shores belov'd, where every wish repos'd;

Far from that widow'd bed, where dreams of fright
Embittered joys, that hope presented still:
Far from those eyes, that wak'd so oft at night,
Dim with a fervent tear, that wept some presag'd ill.

Here first at early morn, with jocund air,
His smile contagious soften'd every pain:
His lightsome whistle banish'd peevish care
And spoke the merry heart, and well-contented swain.

The iron load of toil on him was light,
And laughing stars did at his birth preside;
He mock'd the terrors of destructive fight,
And bless'd the glorious day, when first his zeal was tried.

Whether by duty call'd he trod the waste,
Where the dread thunder of the mortar flies;
Or, speeding homewards with paternal haste
The busy crowded hearth illum'd the parent's eye.

Tranquil his soul. &mdash; At night the busy hum
Of garbling infants stunn'd the cricket's song:
Some on his knee he toss'd; while proudly some
Strutted the house, with sword and bayonet along.

Again the wonted tale of former days
Fix'd the fond ear of his complacent wife;
As still she heard, thro' many a wordy maze,
The thousand hair-breadth hazards of her husband's life.

She fear'd not yet the luckless cast of fate,
Nor dream'd of future grief and helpless need:
She heard him many a comrade's death relate
But little thought she then, his own so soon decreed.

On foreign plains he lies!  the wint'ry wind
Wails through the thorn o'er his sepulchral sod;&mdash;
His bones these arms in their lone cell confin'd:
With patriot's spirits flown, his soul awaits her God!
