Joy of the Poet's soul, I court thy aid!
Spirit of many a calm and soothing lay,
Oft at thy smile has care's dark visions fled,
And grief grown calm, and langour died away.
Oft has thy kindness smooth'd my rugged way,
Bless'd my lone hours and cheer'd my days of toil.
Again, O Muse!  vouchsafe thy bright'ning ray,
Of doubt, of terror, thought's harsh fiend despoil,
And all my anxious cares and all my griefs beguile.

Around our vessel heaves the midnight wave,
The cheerless moon sinks in the western sky;
Reigns breezeless silence; in her ocean cave
The Mermaid rests, while her fond lover nigh
Marks the pale star beams as they fall from high,
Gilding with trem'lous light her couch of sleep.
Why smile incred'lous?  the rapt Muse's eye
Through earth's dark caves, o'er heaven's fair plains can sweep,
Can range each hidden cell where toils th' unfathom'd deep.

On ocean's craggy floor, beneath the shade
Of bushy rock-weed, tangled, dusk, and brown,
She sees the wreck of founder'd vessel laid
In slimy silence; many a fathom down
From where the star-beam trembles; o'er it thrown
Are heap'd the treasures men have died to gain,
And in sad mock'ry of the parting groan
That bubbled mid the wild unpitying main,
Quick gushing o'er the bones the restless tides complain.

Gloomy and wide rolls the sepulchral sea,
Grave of my kindred, of my sire the grave,
Perchance where now he sleeps, a space for me
Is mark'd by fate, beneath the deep green wave.
It well may be.  Poor bosom why dost heave
Thus wild!  O!  many a care troublous and dark
On earth attends thee still; the Mermaid's cave
Grief haunts not:  sure 'twere pleasant there to mark
Serene, at noon-tide hour, the sailor's passing bark.

Sure it were pleasant through the vasty deep,
When on its bosom plays the golden beam,
With headlong speed by bower and cave to sweep,
When flame the waters round with em'rald gleam;
When borne from high by tides and gales the scream
Of sea-mew soften'd falls; when bright and gay
The crimson weeds, proud ocean's pendants, stream
From trophied wrecks, and rock towers darkly grey;
Through scenes so strangely fair 'twere pleasant sure to stray.

Why this strange thought?  if in that ocean laid,
The ear would cease to hear, the eye to see;
Tho' sights and sounds like these circled my bed,
Wakeless and heavy would my slumbers be:
Though the mild soften'd sunlight beam'd on me,
(If a dull heap of bones retained my name,
That bleach'd or blacken'd in the wasteful sea,)
Its radiance all unseen, its golden beam
In vain through coral groves, or em'rald roofs might stream.

Yet dwells a spirit in this earthly frame
Which oceans cannot quench, or time destroy;
A deathless, fadeless ray, a heavenly flame
That pure shall rise when fails each base alloy
That earth instills, dark grief, and baseless joy:
Then shall the ocean's secrets meet its sight,
For I do hold that happy souls enjoy
A wide, yea boundless, endless range of flight
From the fair source of day, ev'n to the gates of night.

Now night's dark veil is rent; on yonder land
That blue and distant rises o'er the main,
I see the purple sky of morn expand,
Scatt'ring the gloom:  then cease my feeble strain,
When darkness reign'd, thy whisp'rings sooth'd my pain,&mdash;
The pain by weariness and langour bred;
But now my eyes shall greet a lovelier scene
Than fancy pictur'd from his dark green bed
Soon shall the orb of day exalt his glorious head.
