'Tis night; around our bark the gloomy wave
All lonely heaves, nor shore nor skiff is nigh;
The gales are sleeping in their mountain cave;
Dull silence reigns supreme, save when the cry
Of wakeful mew disturbs, or when on high
The slacken'd sail flaps to the rolling main:
The orb of night, thron'd in the western sky,
Sheds her expiring rays athwart the scene;
Mournful as tyrant king stretch'd on the couch of pain.

And now, all wakeful, on th' unvexed tide
Awhile by fortune cast, lone watch I keep;
Be still ye swelling thoughts!  ye vaguely chide,
Ev'n as the unlovely dreams of fev'rish sleep;
Sure oft ye've hover'd o'er the wrathful deep,
When howl'd the storm, and o'er the dang'rous shore,
And perch'd on secret shelve and sounding steep,
And bade dull rocks for wretched men deplore;
Sure dost not fear that wave ye oft have wander'd o'er?

No!  yet I love thee not sepulchral sea,
"Grave of my kindred, of my sire the grave;"
I love thee not, &mdash; my grand sire sleeps in thee,
In thee his brothers sleep; vent'rous and brave,
One wander'd patient o'er thy breast, O wave!
The boast and joy of Anson's warrior train;
Dauntless that sailor heard the wild winds rave,
Saw the fight rage, for rich with gold of Spain,
Of home he thought and joy'd, &mdash; alas!  his joys were vain.

Ah fate severe!  when from the castled poop
Gay, joy-bright eyes fair Albion's cliffs descried,
Anguish was his, as on the mirthful group
He turn'd his languid dark'ning gaze, and sigh'd;
Ah wond'rous sweet that life by fate denied!
Ah wond'rous sweet when of his home he thought,
His sire, his friends, his love; alas!  he died;
And long by hope beguil'd, his kindred sought
For tidings of their boy; &mdash; deep woe these searchings brought.

I love thee not, thou deep sepulchral wave,
Thy mountain billows were my grandsire's bier;
Quiet man, he fondly hoped his father's grave,
Where bloom'd the little flowers when smil'd the year,
Should one day darken'd o'er his dust appear.
Stern wave, his bones in thy dark caves are laid!
One day he trimm'd his bark, the skies were clear,
Soft breath'd the gale, glad o'er thy breast he hied,
Night came, fierce howl'd the storm, he toil'd, he sunk, he died.

Twelve moons before, in Croma's shelt'ring bay,
His second brother sunk, nor rose again;
Full oft my grandsire shap'd his lonely way
The winding shores along, and ask'd the main
For that lov'd brother's corse, but ask'd in vain:
The stubborn wave dash'd heedless o'er the shore;
Cruel as fierce it mock'd the suff'rers pain:
Ah!  long its scorn, at length its wrath he bore,
For o'er his head, it clos'd, and grief disturb'd no more.

And thou, my father, when I think of thee
My eyelids moisten with th' unwonted tear;
For thou wert brave as gentle, kind as free,
Stranger alike to brutal rage or fear,
A tender friend, to all thy kindred dear,
Thy soul's intelligence a flash of light,
To tyrant sway and tyrant men severe,
Peace seldom listen'd to thy deeds of might,
But dauntless warrior thou when clos'd the deathful fight.

And oft the fight around thee clos'd my sire,
Oft the red falchion grac'd thy awful hand;
Alas!  unfitly fram'd my rustic lyre
To sing the triumphs of the warrior's brand,
The fray wild thund'ring, and th' ensanguin'd strand:
Yet, gentle warrior, thine no vulgar bard;
His strains ne'er flow'd at interest's base command,
Ne'er flatter'd vice, ah!  his the best reward,&mdash;
A self-approving soul, a much lov'd friend's regard.

Thy birth, thy death, thy deeds of bold emprize,
Thy patient wand'rings o'er the treach'rous brine,
Fain would I sing.  Spirit of song arise!
Awake fair Muse, and be thy numbers mine;
Inspire my grateful song, bid strength combine
With all the sweetness of th' Aonian lyre;
Fain would I frame a little lasting shrine,
And on it grave thy name my honour'd sire,
And round to deck and guard light up the Muse's fire.

Alas!  the Fates forbid; yet shall my lay,
Though rudely fram'd, thy worth, thy toils declare:
Scowl'd bleak misfortune on thy infant day,
Bereavement's bitt'rest pangs thy mother's were,
Heart-sick'ning woe, sharp want, and carking care,
And grief for pleasures gone, and bodings wild,
Her only solace thou, to ward despair,
A little passionless ungrieving child,
Who all unskill'd to mourn, saw her sad tears and smil'd.

But years pass'd by; to want and toil inur'd,
Th' ungrieving child a sailor boy became;
And many a hardship on the wave endur'd,
Whose baleful strength might well the hardiest tame;
They quell'd not thee, thine was a soul of flame,
That fiercer, brighter blaz'd in dang'rous time,
Steel'd by the wintry blast, thy temper'd frame
Dar'd all unharm'd the deaths of every clime,
From India's parched plains to Sembla's snows sublime.

The years pass'd by; fam'd was thy sinewy arm
For feats of strength, thy soul for bold emprize;
The first when rag'd the fight or roar'd the storm,
Yet all unboastful, calm, retir'd, and wise;
Few mark'd the hero in his quiet disguise,
Or wist what slept beneath thy soul's command;
'Twas when occasion bade thy might arise
That doubts and fears perplex'd th' oppressor's hand,
And died the cruel heart, and fail'd the ruthless band.

Twice didst thou dare the wave to snatch from death
A poor toil destin'd swain, and luckless boy;
Once when the midnight billows foam'd beneath
The beetling cliffs, toiling in dire employ,
Though tides, and waves, and winds, rose to destroy,
Thy little pinnace left the sounding shore;
Joy to the found'ring bark!  a voice of joy
Swells loud, wild mingling with the tempest's roar,
"Haste sailors, quit your bark, the waves are gath'ring o'er!"

Not meagre want disturb'd thy mother's age,
Comfort and quiet cheer'd her lonely way;
Save when the sweeping blast with wintry rage
Howl'd through the hideous night and cheerless day;
Ah!  then her dreams of joy would fade away,
As roam'd her fancies o'er th' enraged tide,
And darksome thoughts clos'd round; &mdash; but Heaven's glad ray 
Would rise, and these disperse; oft had she pray'd
For thee, her latest stay, her solitary pride.

Not all unanswer'd was that widow's prayer,
For oft around thee dangers clos'd in vain;
Yea, thou hast breath'd unharm'd the tainted air,
When all around arose the moans of pain;
Three days a pris'ner on th' Indian main
Th' upturn'd keel thy resting place remain'd;
Twelve hours the mountain billows roll'd amain
Thy bark in triumph o'er on Scotia's strand;
And thrice the desert's king fled from thy awful brand.

Prepare, O Muse!  of deadly fight to sing,
Of wars whose thund'rings calm'd th' affrighted sea:
Alas my lyre!  slackens thy every string,
When wak'd to loftiest strains thy chords should be?
The hero's battle deeds are not for thee,
Thine be a fainter thine a lowlier strain,
Perchance ev'n low as song of mountain bee;
And yet thy voice was ne'er awaked in vain,
Grief flies the sound dismay'd, and fly the fiends of pain.

Of death prepare to sing!  of awful death!
Say wherefore awful to th' accepted soul?
On earth Joy nestles in the conqueror's wreath,
Her flowerets bloom around the mirthful bowl,
She visits love:  but fate with stern control
Casts clouds and darkness o'er her lovliest day;
O!  'tis when honest worth attains its goal,
That fadeless pleasure pours th' eternal ray,
While Change on earth remains, lord of the mould'ring clay.

Round Albyn's western shores a lonely skiff
Is coasting slow, the adverse winds detain;
And now she rounds secure the dreaded cliff,
Whose horrid ridge beats back the northern main;
And now the whirling Pentland roars in vain
Her stern beneath, for fav'ring breezes rise,
The green isles fade, whitens the wat'ry plain,
O'er its vex'd waves with meteor speed she flies,
Till Moray's distant hills o'er the blue waves arise.

Who guides that vessel's wand'rings o'er the wave?
A patient hardy man, of thoughtful brow,
Serene, and warm of heart, and wisely brave,
And sagely skill'd, whatever gale may blow,
To press through angry waves th' advent'rous prow;
Age hath not quell'd his strength, nor quench'd desire
Of gen'rous deed, nor chill'd his bosom's glow,
Yet to a better world his hopes aspire:
Ah!  this must sure be thee; all hail my honour'd sire!

Alas!  thy latest voyage draws near a close,
For death broods voiceless in the dark'ning sky;
Subsides the breeze, th' untroubled waves repose,
The scene is peaceful all:  can death be nigh,
When thus unarm'd and quiet his vassals lie?
Mark ye that cloud?  there toils th' imprison'd gale,
Ev'n now it comes with voice uplifted high,
Resound the shores, harsh screams the rending sail,
And roars th' amazed wave, and bursts the thunder peal.

Three days the tempest raged; on Scotia's shore
Wreck pil'd on wreak, and corse on corse was thrown;
Her ragged cliffs were red with clotted gore,
Her dark caves echoed back th' expiring moan,
And luckless maidens mourned their lovers gone,
And friendless orphans cried in vain for bread,
And widowed mothers wander'd forth alone,&mdash;
Restore, O wave, they cried, restore our dead!
And then the breast they bar'd, and beat th' unshelter'd head.

Of thee my sire, what mortal tongue can tell?
No friendly bay thy shatter'd bark received,
Ev'n when thy dust repos'd in ocean cell,
Strange baseless tales of hope thy friends deceived,
Which oft they doubted sad, or gay believed.
At lengths when deeper, darker wax'd the gloam,
Hopeless they griev'd, but 'twas in vain they griev'd;
If God be truth, 'tis sure no voice of doom
That bids th' accepted soul its robes of joy assume.

Now rest my lyre, thy pleasing task is o'er,
Now rest my heart, thy cares are worse than vain;
What are the griefs of time!  its blackest hour
Must pass away, nor can its bright remain,
For Change hath bound it with a varied chain,
Where links of gold, and brass, and iron appear,
Ev'n death itself is his, beyond his reign
Extends not, virtue drops no bitter tear,
Nor joy th' accursed souls, nor cease their pains severe.

Lovely the hope that tells of bliss to come,
Wond'rous the God who gave that hope his seal!
Fly ye gross thoughts!  ye impious doubts be dumb!
'Tis He, 'tis He Himself who rends the veil,
Whose voice is heard when bursts the thunder peal,
Whose mighty will the waves and winds obey;
O then be wise my soul!  when cares assail,
And griefs of earth, think of that awful day,
When all, save God's esteem, shall sink in dire decay.

And now awhile repose my rustic lyre,
Slow moves th' unwilling hand that lays thee by;
When thee my arms sustain not grief can tire,
Nor pain oppress; perchance an hour is nigh
When I shall wake thy chords to rapture high;
Yea, till cold hearts confess a kindred glow,
And vile desires and recreant passions die;
Ev'n as I sing, less harsh thy numbers flow,
And flies, each anxious care, each thought that whispereth woe.
