No star of golden influence hail'd the birth
Of him who all unknown and lonely, pours
As fails the light of eve,
His pensive artless song.

Yea, those who mark out honour, wealth, ease, fame,
As man's sole joys, shall find no joy in him;
Yet of far nobler kind
His silent pleasures prove.

For not unmark'd by him the ways of men,
Nor yet to him the ample page unknown,
Where trac'd by nature's hand
Is many a pleasing line.

O!  when the world's dull children bend the knee,
Meanly obsequious, to some mortal god,
It yields no vulgar joy
Alone to stand aloof.

Or when they jostle on wealth's crowded road,
And swell the tumult on the breeze, 'tis sweet,
Thoughtful, at length reclin'd,
To list the wrathful hum.

O!  what though foolish men affect to scorn
The loitering dreamer of life's darkest shade,
Stingless the jeer whose voice
Comes from th' erroneous path.

Scorner, of all your toils the end declare!
If pleasure, pleasure comes uncall'd to cheer
The haunts of him who spends
His hours in quiet thought.

O!  happier he who can repress desire,
Than they who seldom mourn a thwarted wish;
The vassals they of fate,
Th' unbending conqueror he.

And thou blest Muse, though rudely strung thy lyre,
Its tones can guile the dark and lonesome day,
Can smooth the wrinkled brow,
And dry the sorrowing tear.

Thine many a bless, O!  many a solace thine;
By thee upheld the soul asserts her throne,
The chasten'd passions sleep,
And dove-eyed peace prevails.

And thou fair Hope, when other comforts fail,
When night's thick mists descend, thy beacon flames
Till glow the clouds around
With beams of promised bliss.

Thou failest not, when mute the soothing lyre,
Lives thy unfading solace; sweet to raise
Thy eye, O!  quiet Hope,
And greet a friend in Heaven.

A friend, a brother, one whose awful throne
In holy fear Heaven's mightiest sons approach;
One powerful to defend,
And to destroy resistless.

O hope sublime!  'tis undeceiving hope
That builds upon th' Eternal, and the thought
That truly tells of Him,
From Him alone proceeds,

Truth's only source.  Unsullied page of God,
What were my steadiest hopes untaught of thee?
Dreams of the wakeful day,
Bright, but delusive all.

What were my loftiest thoughts?  children of doubt.
Fancies, &mdash; perchance of staid and sober hue,
But specious as the cloud
That mocks the sailor's gaze,

When long by adverse winds and battling waves
Held from the port desired, on summer's eve,
When not a breath disturbs
The silvery wave immense,

From the tall poop his longing eyes are turn'd,
The purple hills, and woods, and fields to greet,
The lakes and winding streams
Ev'n of a land well known.

High joy is his; but lo!  the breeze of eve
Roughens the dark'ning main; in wreaths of cloud
The lofty hills descend,
The fields are roll'd away.

Ah sad illusion!  the poor sailor's heart
Grows cold and sick, for scarce a hope survives;
Fix'd on the pictur'd cloud,
Breeze-borne, they hied away.

Volume of God all hail!  from thee alone
Unblent with error flow the streams of truth.
O spring unsoil'd and pure,
Welling from th' eternal rock,

Not as the dull forgetful brook art thou
Of old by poets feign'd, whose turbid waves,
Blent with the stream of time,
Darken'd its measured flow;

For thine the present, thine the doubtful past,
And thine the wonders of a coming day;
The lyre of prophecy,
The awful voice of God.

Man of dark studious brow, thy painful years
Are spent in gloomy cell, where all around
The lore of ancient days
Thy patient search abides:

Say art thou wise!  throughout the cheerful day
O'er the broad page thy failing eyes are thrown,
And when the sober night
Bids the tir'd peasant rest,

Thy lamp's red flame, ev'n till the dawn of morn,
Draws the staid gaze of watchful mariner,
As coasting patient on
He wooes the breeze of night.

Say art thou wise!  evil prevails on earth,
The shouts of war, famine's dire groans arise,
And hideous Tyranny
Uplifts his front to Heaven;

While virtue (if in truth on earth there lives
That which the Poets praised) is vexed sore,
And lo!  'mid gath'ring shades,
Wide yawns th' abhorred vault;

It closeth: &mdash; sure like fate awaits on all,
And like reward!  say, know'st thou aught of death?
Say, in life's troublous scene
Does aught of God appear?

Poor wretch art silent!  madly gay or griev'd,
As dreams of seeming truth or doubts arise,
Thy long laborious life
Is spent in doing nought.

The fleeting shades that o'er the summer mead
At noon-tide sail, telling how speeds the breeze
Viewless, through upper air,
When all is calm beneath,

Are emblems of thy thoughts; the icy tower
Wafted by tides, and gales, and heaving waves
From Sembla's dreary coasts
To regions of the Sun,

Shews semblance meet to all thy systems fair.&mdash;
Sporting with the gay sunbeam, glitt'ring bright,
Lo, on the ocean's verge
A precious gem it seems;

Now nearer borne, bright spires and domes arise,
And battled towers, and turrets loop'd around,
And roofs of gorgeous halls,
And palaces sublime;

And now still nearer borne, it towers confess'd
A hard cold icy mass; no shelter there
The crew of found'ring bark
Finds from the greedy wave,

But rather death.  See how unresting change,
As darts the beam that gilds it and destroys,
Flits o'er its shapeless spires,
Moulding their forms anew.

In fleshly bark on life's rough ocean toss'd,
Say, dost thou trust man of the thoughtful brow,
To that cold icy cliff,
So soon to melt away?

Say, art thou wise!  soon shall the tempest rave,
And the deep rayless shades of night descend;
Soon o'er the faithless main
Shall death's dread vassals rage.

Perchance against that cliff thy hapless bark
May strike, toss'd by the surge; one echoing crash
Above the wide spread roar
Would rise, one fearful shriek,

And straightway, stillness reign, the calm of death,
Thus Cato, Brutus thus in fate's dark hour,
Struck 'gainst the trusted cliff
On which their hopes were rear'd;

And from life's twilight to the midnight shades
Of death were driven; the storm rag'd, but its pow'r
To ravage and destroy,
Their treach'rous refuge gave.

Say, wilt thou learn, man of th' unending toil,
Of care, and doubt, and system, &mdash; wilt thou learn
How all things are, and why,
And what th' appointed end?

Say, wilt thou learn of Him on whom thy hopes
May safe repose, nor fear th' outrageous blast?
Nay, but thou smil'st in scorn,
And frowns that brow of pride.

Not to the slave of ancient Greece, nor yet
To him the sculptor, wisest deemed of men,
I woo thy mem'ry forth,
Th' unseemly gibe to quell:

For mine no boast of native pow'rs sublime,
O'er toil triumphant and the lack of lore;
Not mine the skill to teach,
Go search the page of Heaven.

It tells how this bright world and the fair stars
Sprung into being, how th' Eternal word
Bade thinking souls exist,
And matter heave with life.

How ill began, and how for wretched men,
He who on Heaven's high throne exalted sat,
Ruling that universe
His potent word gave birth,

Descended, and a man of many woes,
A houseless, homeless wand'rer, griev'd and poor,
The sport of tempting fiends,
Of fools the scorn became.

It tells how tortur'd, smitten, mock'd, despis'd,
Of men forsaken and betray'd, by God
Forsaken too, he bled
Stretch'd on the murd'rer's cross;

Wept, groan'd, and died, and in the silent tomb
Lay prostrate, the ungrieving thrall of death,&mdash;
Of death, its robe of power
Fett'ring each blood-stain'd limb.

Lo, he has risen!  on the polished arms
Of the fear-stricken soldier, gleams a light
Like that of summer's morn
By gentle streamlet caught.

And death flies howling, and the powers of hell
Hie to their dark and dolorous abode,
Ev'n in the home of pain
Severer pain to hide.

Lo, he has risen!  to the awful sky
O turn thy gaze, man of the thoughtful brow,
There, 'mid the blest of Heaven,
Is fix'd th' eternal throne,

Ev'n of the man thy Brother, ev'n of Him
Thy God, who form'd and soon will judge the world:
The friend of hapless man,
His hand is stretch'd to save.

What is the smile of king, the voice of mirth,
Of wealth the joy, of fame the fickle breath;
What all the glitt'ring baits
That tempt earth's atheist sons?

Little and poor, and vile.  Fair page of truth
Is God my God!  say am I known of Him,
Whose hand sustains the sky,
With all its glitt'ring host?

Say, am I known, yea, known and much belov'd,
Of Him, the King of kings, the Lord of lords:
Swell heart with loftiest joy!
Vile thoughts of earth retire!

Retire, I love you not: &mdash; Now, O my God!
Thou of the ear and eye attent, descend,
And as thy Spirit chas'd
The deep, the eternal shades

That o'er th' outrageous waves of the dead earth
Rung brooding, so ev'n now thy living light
Pour on my darken'd heart,
With sin dispelling beam;

For evil passions, low and faithless cares,
Desires that brood o'er earthly things, and doubts,
Hell born, and wishes foul,
Oft make a.  dwelling there.

Descend, O son of David!  Lord, thy heart,
Save that it knows not sin, is form'd like mine;
Round it temptations raged,
My foes rage every where;

Within, without, around:  O!  I am weak,
Yea, strengthless wholly in a righteous cause
Are all my native powers,
Though strong in evil act.

Shield me ev'n from myself, save from the fiend;
As are the grains of summer dust compared.
With those vast orbs that roll
Round the fair source of light,

So are my powers to his; but his with thine
Compare not; finite, and utter weakness,
Are terms, O Lord, to thee
Of like import and power.

Rejoice my soul in God!  Rejoice in God!
He is thy wisdom, He, O soul, thy strength;
All fulness dwells in Him,
From Him all blessings flow.

Conqueror of death!  joy of th' accepted soul!
O!  wonders raise no doubt when told of thee.
Thy way past finding out;
Thy love can tongue declare?

Cheer'd by thy smile, peace dwells amid the storm;
Held by thy hand, the floods assail in vain;
With grief is blent a joy,
And beams the vault of death.
