Saint Lawrence' bell proclaims the closing day,
The famished beaux trip home front cards and tea,
Slows moves the drone from yonder bench away,
And leaves the Forbery to the night and me.

Now each tired shopman to his garret hies,
And all the streets unusual stillness hold,
Save where for pap some brat incessant cries,
Or stuns her sleepy spouse yon restless scold.

Save where, in lonely cell, three stories high,
Yon fidler grates upon his screaking string,
Who doomed in vain th' unyielding art to try,
Scarce scrapes with murderous hand, "God save the King!"

Within these roofs for peaceful slumber made,
Where rise the chequered beds in radiant rows,
Fatigued with toil and play, till morning laid,
The hopes of many a family repose.

The sickly pomp of midnight masquerade,
The coach late rattling from the crowded ball,
The rout's loud hum, or birth-day's gay parade,
Ne'er from their wonted rest these striplings call.

For them no lamps with varied colors shine,
No liveried lacqueys yawn till peep of day,
No link boys round with rival care combine
To light their stumbling steps across the way.

Oft to their patience yields each stubborn rule,
Their pen full oft at exercise is seen.
How jocund when each eve let loose from school,
They wake their sport upon the chearful green!

Let not swollen Science mock their little toil,
Their early rudiments and dawning sense,
Nor College Tutors hear with scornful smile
The simple labors of voice, mood and tense.

The boast of genius and of industry,
All, for which Poets soar, or Scholars plod,
Await alike the public's stern decree,
And dread the Critic's vengeance as the rod.

Nor you, you Fair, withhold from these the praise,
If ne'er proud fashion fix their humble doom,
Where, 'mid the rustling silk and diamond's blaze,
The tongue of scandal prattles round the room.

Can MARA'S voice, or VESTRIS' skill refined
A life of sloth and ignorance repay?
Can public pastimes soothe the vacant mind,
Ne'er warmed by Truth, or Science' genial ray?

Perhaps in these retirements are concealed
Some bosoms pregnant with celestial fire,
Hands, that the rod of Government may wield,
Or tune to deeds of fame the mystic lyre.

But to their raptured view delusive Power
Her list of offices does ne'er unroll;
Stern Fate restrains them in youth's early hour,
And checks the struggles of th' aspiring soul.

Full many a column of the massive hall
Within the quarry shapeless once was laid:
Full many an oak of stateliest timber tall
Has lived unseen beneath the parent shade.

Some HOWARD, fraught with pity's mildest store,
May learn the miseries of mankind to heal;
Some WARTON here may spell his fabled lore;
Some rising BURKE here glow with patriot zeal.

To search the dungeon's inmost caverns low,
The fears of plague and sickness to command;
To bind the Laureat wreath around their brow,
Or shine the champions of a subject land,

Their age forbids; nor thus alone confined
Their glorious labors, but each vainer care,
Forbids with hacknied themes to tire the mind,
Or waste their rhetoric in Corruption's ear;

The conscious pangs of inborn worth to hide,
To still the murmurs of reluctant shame,
To mark the triumph of insulting Pride,
By fury lighted up at Faction's flame.

Far from the noisy haunts of public strife
Their infant wishes never learn to stray;
Along the stiller vale of classic life
They keep their peaceful unentangled way.

Yet these from dull oblivion to defend,
Some bright production of their early days,
Some polished theme perhaps, or verse well penned,
From future readers claims a willing praise.

Their active courage, or their mind's repose,
Some old companions may from memory draw,
Who feats of play or scholarship disclose,
That bind the junior class in listening awe,

For who, to selfish solitude a prey,
This simply sweet society resigned,
Forsook the chearful partners of his play,
Nor left a longing sorrowing friend behind?

On some loved breast the parting youth relies,
Some kindred soul his fond farewell requires;
Still back with eager glance keen Fancy flies,
Still burns their friendship with its former fires.

For thee, by warm remembrance fondly moved
In verse uncouth their story to relate,
If, viewing once again the scenes he loved,
Some grateful Scholar should inquire thy fate;

Haply some lingering Monitor may say:
His slender figure we have kenned full well,
Brushing from yonder mead the dew away,
To reach the distant school at morning bell.

There in yon Library's unsocial shade,
That rears its books in many a dusty pile,
His listless length till evening oft he laid,
And pored upon the Greek, that mocked his toil.

Hard by yon wall, with inward musings torn,
Muttering aloud his crabbed rhymes he strayed,
Drooping with downcast head, like one forlorn,
For pranks detected, or for tasks unsaid.

One morning, at the bell's accustomed call,
We sought in vain his hastening steps to see:
Another came, nor yet beside the wall,
Nor yet within the library was he.

The next, with habits due, and just array,
At OXFORD'S towers he pledged his solemn vow.
Some hand in kindness penned a farewell lay:
Attend, 'tis short, and thou mayst hear it now.

HERE passed his days, not destitute of worth,
A youth to fashion and to fame unknown,
The Graces smiled not on his humble birth,
And rustic shyness marked him for her own.

His powers were scanty, but sincere his heart;
Large as his wish, Heaven did its blessings give
From him each scholar proved a brother's part,
His fondest hope is in their love to live.

No further strive the fruitless search to move;
He seeks not here his merits to extend:
Content if one his humble toils approve,
"The Master of the Poet, and the Friend!"
