Certes, 'tis true, that I was born to toil,
To wend through life's remotest paths my way:
I hew the pond'rous stone with ceaseless moil,
And wake to labour each returning day.
O!  what were life to me, if fail'd the ray
Which Heav'n has deign'd to cheer th' unlovely gloom?
O!  what were life, if hied the muse away?
The muse that tells (her's are no tales of doom,)
Of bliss in life enjoy'd, of joys beyond the tomb.

'Tis true, to me nor wealth, nor fame she brings,&mdash;
Harsh her best tones, and low her loftiest strain;
Yet Grief entranc'd leans list'ning as she sings,
Her dark forbodings quell'd, and ceas'd her plain:
Then say, grave censor, sings my muse in vain;
Save bliss, man nothing seeks on earth below,
And bliss is thine, O muse!  to thee if pain,
Or care, or sorrow wrings, to thee I'll go,
And all my sighs shall cease, shall cease my tears to flow.

Nor will I grieve though to myself confin'd
Be all of good my artless muse can give;
Fame is not joy, nor health, nor peace of mind,
It boasts no pow'r o'er pain, no force in love.
Harold, 'twas thine its prime regards to prove;
But ah!  was't thine pleasure or pain to know?
Thy lays alike to grief and wonder move:
Yes, far as ear has caught their magic flow,
Thy genius this demands, and that thy matchless woe.

Needless to tell of wealth to grief allied,
Needless to tell of pangs th' ambitious own;
Grief dogs with tireless step the selfish pride
That grasps at glory due to Heaven alone.
O!  this the mystery of the woes of man,
That in himself centres his prime desire;
E'er since his griefs, his pains, his toils began,
His own vile god he lives; vile oft the fire
That warms the warrior's soul, that gilds the minstrel's lyre.

And see, the warrior's toils, the minstrel's lay,
Misery and fame, glory and death await.
O dull to learn!  ye gods of fragile clay,&mdash;
Of souls perplex'd and dark, why boast elate
That lying fame has dubb'd you wise and great?
In Heaven's esteem vile are your powers and low:
'Tis not in wrath unmix'd that on you wait
Sorrows, and cares, and pains, &mdash; ye wretched, know
These come the faulty aims of your vex'd lives to show.

Where strays the muse?  nay not of wealth nor fame,
Nor toil, nor grief, nor care I ask the lay;
Give rather, if thou canst, for some will blame
The idle freak, that to the glare of day,
To cold neglect perchance, or scorn, a prey,
Casts what thou whisper'd in the silent night;
Give, if thou canst, one sober reason why
Thy simple lays, long hid, should court the light:
The common meed of fame thou disregardest quite.

Oft have I seen the baffl'd fiends of woe
Chain'd by the magic of thy artless strain;
And now I harbour a desire, to know
If 'tis thy right o'er many hearts to reign,
Or if to all that live thou sing'st in vain,
Save to the minstrel of the lone recess.
Muse of the desert!  would that pow'r were thine,
The good to aid, the gen'rous heart to bless,
The bowed down to raise, the oppressor to repress!

The minstrel's power monarchs in vain desire!
(Power o'er th' opinions and the souls of men);
'Tis his to warm the brave with gen'rous fire,
To scourge the vicious, and repress the vain;
More potent still, 'tis his to burst the chain
That tyrants forge, &mdash; the chain that frets the soul,
Till all its thoughts grow ill, its feelings pain;
Scar'd at his frown, Excess has fled the bowl,
And wasting cares have died, vile thoughts, and passions foul.

Such were his pow'rs, who by the winding Ouse,
To God, not Fame, inscrib'd the exalted lay
Such were his pow'rs, who where the Camus flows,
Wasted in tasks severe his life away;
Such were his powers, who sung war's fierce array,
With horrid front dark'ning the fields of Heav'n,
Hell's direful vault, the Anarch's idle sway,
And miserable man from Eden driv'n:&mdash;
Ah!  would such wond'rous pow'rs to th' untaught Bard were given.

The awful Bacon woo'd the muse in vain,
And Plato call'd on Vulcan's fires to aid,
For her's the muse withheld; and Caesar's strain,
Unform'd to please, sleeps in th' oblivious shade;
Weak was the verse Rome's hapless Consul made,
Ev'n he whose thunders 'mid the forum roll'd,
When the world's mighty conq'ror shook dismay'd;
Enough &mdash; be thus the scoffer's gibes repell'd,
If wight untaught and rude, should fail where Tully fail'd.
