Impassion'd Spirits, of no earthly mould,
Whose souls the attributes of Heav'n unfold;
Who, stampt with Nature's universal seal,
Can nobly stiffer, and sublimely feel:
Say, whence the hope and rapture of those ties,
That God ordain'd, and social feelings prize?
Say, whence the fortitude that danger braves,
That shares with pity, or with courage saves?
That yields for those it loves its latest breath,
And smiles serenely in the arms of death?
What the strong impulse all are proud to claim?
But Nature, Love, and FRIENDSHIP, all the same.

Wide in its influence, ardent in its force,
The mother's love displays its purest source;
Her joyful transports, and her nameless fears,
As fancy droops, or hope reviving cheers,
Demand no fond return, no mutual aid,
By love itself the debt of love is paid.
Her's the persuasive glance, th' inspiring word,
That snatch'd the infant from th' uplifted sword;
Her's the nice instinct, whose unerring test
Proclaim'd the secret of the tortur'd breast;
The voice of Nature o'er the wiles of Art,
The matchless triumph of a mother's heart.
And if e'en here some shades of grief we scan,
Say, is unsullied bliss the lot of man?
If in this chequer'd scene of things below,
Beneath each blessing, lurks some hidden woe,
'Tis that alternate pain, and pleasing hope,
May give the mingled feelings all their scope;
And that these anxious objects of our care
A stronger claim, and dearer love may share.
For chasten'd joy to pensive minds is dear,
And rapture sparkles in the starting tear.
As souls like these through doubts and terrors rove,
Their bliss is heighten'd by sublimer love.

Near NILUS' stream, in all the pangs of grief,
Maternal anguish sought her last relief;
When to avert the cruel fate decreed,
The Hebrew Mother twin'd the pliant reed;
With many a sigh the feeble bark she wove,
Frail as her hopes, and tender as her love.
Nor deem'd she then that Heav'n itself inspir'd
The daring thought her throbbing bosom fir'd;
And that she trusted to the rolling wave,
A chosen guide to succour and to save;
Her nation's stay in sorrow's trying hour,
The type of Grace, and Mercy's healing pow'r.
Thus the all-bounteous hand of Heav'n unites
Life's sacred duties with its dear delights;
And stamps this golden maxim on the breast:
In blessing others we ourselves are blest.

Ah, trite indeed, no solitary joy
Can the fine movements of the soul employ;
Its restless pow'rs, by sick'ning fancy tost,
In idle fears and airy visions lost,
Long for some tie on which its hopes may rest,
Some cherish'd happiness not yet possest.
Else why her constant pray'r, her ceaseless cry:
"Oh!  give me children, Lord, or else I die!"
The pray'r was heard, the fatal treasure giv'n.
Presumptuous wish, importunate to Heav'n!
For while a mother's transports fill'd her heart,
Nature turn'd pale, and Death display'd his dart.

As the sweet charms of modesty and sense
Are best display'd within the social fence;
So best of all the mother's heart is seen
In the retiring shade, and hour serene;
And most of all, when intellect refin'd
Unfolds the hidden treasures of the mind.
On smiling lips, where female softness dwells,
Instruction sits, and weaves her potent spells;
And blending pleasure with the themes of truth,
She forms the soul, and moulds the heart of youth.
Tho' from the world's gay haunts these duties fly,
In secret blossom, and in silence die;
Her's are the tranquil regions of repose,
Secure from idle joys, or fancied woes;
A world, commanding all that taste and sense,
In calm seclusion, to the soul dispense;
Where hope and harmony's enchanting pow'rs
Gild the gay visions of her happiest hours:
And thro' the shad'wy veil of fate descry
A smiling scene of bright unclouded sky:
The seat of virtue, that no storms molest,
The settled sunshine of a spotless breast.

And does not filial tenderness prepare
A sweet reward for Nature's early care?
From infant beauty, with its artless wiles,
To dawning intellect's expressive smiles,
As life unfolds, some new endearment flows,
Some winning charm, where pure affection glows.
Thron'd in a look, or glist'ning in a tear,
These choicest treasures of the heart appear;
And thro' the gloom of sickness, grief, and pain,
Bid hope revive, and rapture bloom again.
Yet all these softer attributes we find
Link with the bolder virtues of the mind;
And rous'd to action in a higher sphere,
Blaze with concentred force, and triumph here.
As the bright glory of celestial pow'r,
In the lone horrors of the midnight hour,
Illum'd the gloomy confines of restraint,
And burst the fetters of the captive saint:
She, pious child, to Grecian memory dear,
Unaw'd by justice, unsubdu'd by fear,
With love sublime, a father's prison shar'd,
And to his lips her swelling bosom bar'd;
From whence the warm and living stream that flow'd,
Gave back the being filial duty ow'd.
And he, whose stern revenge each plea refus'd,
By love employ'd, and soft persuasion us'd,
When neither wife, nor child, nor native home,
Could raise one feeling for ungrateful ROME;
By filial duty's stronger pleadings won,
Sunk the proud Roman in the tender son.
Nor he less fond, who from proud ILIUM'S shore,
Thro' scorching flames his aged parent bore.
So PLINY, midst the earth's convulsive jar,
When Nature shook with elemental war,
The dark abyss and burning lava brav'd,
And from impending death a mother sav'd.

And let the sister's love, and brother's truth,
Immortalize the hallow'd ties of youth:
Here bounteous Heav'n her fair creation crown'd,
Souls of no sex, in sacred union bound;
But where the shades of sex perhaps may claim
A tend'rer care, and wake a livelier flame.
As innocence her helpless state endears,
And his protecting arm her heart reveres;
More strongly glows each transport of the mind,
That knits the rosy bands sweet FRIENDSHIP tw'n'd.
And while the modest beauties of the maid
Give to his bolder deeds a soft'ning shade,
His daring courage, and exalted sense,
To her the loftier energies dispense,
Of matchless fortitude, and bounteous pride
Bright virtues e'en to woman's sphere allied.
Twins in affection, lineament and soul,
In sacred harmony their moments roll.
His heart and sentiment in her we trace,
Adorn'd with all the charms of female grace:
In him her mind, her features, and her air,
More boldly touch'd, less exquisitely fair.

So, when the portrait's glowing beauties give
Those breathing forms where truth and nature live,
In the rich tints these mimic strokes display,
Each harsher outline gently melts away;
And the fair copy of each charm we view
Drawn with a lighter hand, and mellower hue.

Immortal Love!  thy pow'r Creation sways,
Each bosom owns thee, and each heart obeys:
'Tis thine to bid the slumb'ring spirit soar
To heights sublime, and worlds of bliss explore;
To deeds of fame and glory's wreaths aspire,
And feed its flaming torch with heav'nly fire!
From this sweet transport, say, what breast's secure?
The bold avow it, and the meek endure;
The rough it softens, and the rude disarms,
Expands the selfish, and the senseless charms;
Tho' breath'd thro' sighs, and oft bedew'd with tears,
To pensive minds this but the pain endears;
And these lov'd griefs, so long indulg'd, proclaim
The pain is pleasure by another name.
'Tis the strong link that kindred spirits binds;
'Tis the last polish of exalted minds;
'Tis rapture kindled at affection's shrine,
And virtue strengthen'd by a force divine.
For not by love is meant that restless joy,
Which smiles to wound, and dazzles to destroy;
Derives its birth from beauty's fading flow'r,
And like its emblem, blossoms but an hour;
That sees perfection never found below,
Save in the rapture of a lover's vow;
When daring souls celestial regions rove,
To deck with angel charms a mortal love;
As bold PROMETHEUS, from the realms of day,
Stole heav'nly fire to light his fashion'd clay:
But all that lasts when beauty's charms are fled,
When sense expires, and gross desire is dead;
The joy reflection's silent hour can bear,
Reason can justify, and virtue share.
Love best display'd in mis'ry's bitter lot,
Which, triumphs most when pleasure is forgot.

Oh!  for that hallow'd voice, whose strains sublime
Sang wedded love in Eden's blissful time;
When no mistrust disturb'd its guileless joy,
Love knew no doubt, and rapture no alloy;
When Heav'n's great host compos'd the glorious train,
And list'ning Angels pour'd the nuptial strain;
While the Almighty's fiat from on high,
Proclaim'd to worlds unborn the sacred tie;
And bade th' immortal cup of pleasure flow
In endless streams, unmix'd with human woe.

Connubial love, behold thy alter'd state!
Mingled with mutual wrongs, and mutual hate;
The sullen discontent, the silent grief,
The hopeless mis'ry that mocks relief;
The lips condemn'd in tender strains to move,
When the heart sickens at the name of love.
The blushing maid, by sordid int'rest sold,
And virtue barter'd for increase of gold;
Discord and doubt, with jealous passion's strife,
The tyrant husband, and the faithless wife;
And where we trace those beauties of the mind,
That souls congenial in pure concord bind;
Some adverse star, relentless power, presides,
Their fortune severs, and their fate divides;
Blasts every joy in youth's enchanting bloom,
And makes the widow'd heart an early tomb.

So, from her tender mate relentless torn,
The plaintive ring-dove wears the bleeding thorn;
Tho' rack'd with grief, and tortur'd with the pain,
Still in the ear she thrills her melting strain;
Still wooes his shadow thro' the mournful groves,
A very shade herself for him she loves.
Nursing the sickly visions hope once shed,
Till the warm pulse of health and life are fled.

To snatch your fame from dark oblivion's wing,
Your proud memorials, honor'd matrons, bring;
And let your bright examples nobly prove,
Some traces still remain of wedded love;
That ere this happy spirit wing'd its way
To the blest regions of celestial day,
Her voice proclaim'd thro' long revolving years,
That gay with smiles, or dimm'd with sorrow's tears,
This tender tie no common state should know,
But feel the vast extremes of bliss or woe.

Devoted ARRIA, wife of heav'nly mould!
To latest ages shall thy tale be told;
While FRIENDSHIP doubting, in thy double claim,
Which tender duty most exalts thy fame,
Records the love that near an infant's bier,
With matchless courage check'd the starting tear;
To shine the wife, renounc'd the mother's part,
And spar'd the anguish of a father's heart.
And when tyrannic law condemn'd her lord,
In her own bosom plung'd the fatal sword;
And glorying as she drew the reeking blade,
To point the path, and mingle shade with shade;
In death's last pang supprest the parting sigh,
And taught a Roman Hero how to die.

And she, who nobly shar'd a husband's fate,
The guiltless victim of a cruel state,
Whose love and anguish, veil'd from human sight,
Gave birth to beauty in the shades of night;
Shrouded the pledge of FRIENDSHIP in its bloom,
And cradled Nature in an early tomb.

And CARIA'S Queen, whom distant times record,
Who drank the ashes of her valued lord:
But tho' this bright memorial of her fame
Admiring worlds to distant years proclaim;
Tho' beauty then might boast her roseate hues,
And mantling health a glowing charm diffuse;
'Twas but the law of nature rul'd her mind,
Ashes to ashes, dust to dust consign'd."

From ev'ry hope in life's fair prospects torn,
Her martyr'd lord, see pious RACHEL mourn;
She, who beyond e'en life and love could prize
A glorious recompense beyond the skies;
Who to the little hour that guilt might claim,
Preferr'd his honor and unsullied fame;
And from the judgment of a tyrant's laws,
To God and future ages left his cause.
O potent miracle of wedded love!
The Friend renounc'd, to crown the Saint above;
That Friend, for whom the gallant MONMOUTH rose,
A faithful champion midst a host of foes,
Unsheath'd in Freedom's cause th' avenging sword,
And wept to share the blow he could not ward;
That Friend, whom CAVENDISH implor'd in vain,
To change with him the captive's galling chain;
Who nobly scorn'd a base inglorious flight,
Purchas'd by Honor, and by FRIENDSHIP'S right;
And meekly bowing to a traitor's fate,
Expir'd the victim of a tyrant's hate.

But, ah!  not here the hope of ENGLAND fled;
Virtue still liv'd, tho' guiltless RUSSELL bled;
The deathless lustre of whose soul we trace
In other RUSSELLS of his noble race;
In whom as pure the mantling current flow'd;
In whom as bright the love of honor glow'd;
As firm in liberty's defence unmov'd,
Like him lamented, and like him belov'd.

But do these warm effusions of the heart
Demand the culture of improving art?
Glows not the breast in nature's rudest clime,
With love as pure, with fervors as sublime?
Tho' rock'd by storms, and nurtur'd in the wild,
As Fortune's fav'rite, Education's child.
Yes, to this heav'nly flame the soul expands,
Tho' darkling Error forge her iron bands;
Tho' not in learning's dazzling page enroll'd,
Her feelings triumph, by no force controul'd;
And from the poles to earth's remotest plain,
Extends her vast and universal reign;
But as the spark in dying embers lies,
Till the reviving breath of Heav'n arise,
When fann'd to life, it spreads its glowing rays,
And circling mounts in wide triumphant blaze.
So oft, to calm indifference resign'd,
Repose these silent energies of mind,
Till some idea touch the secret chain,
Where, closely link'd, the busy thoughts remain;
Which, rous'd to action, joy or grief dispense,
As flow the sympathies of soul and sense.
The fond memorial of our lives preserve,
Breathe in each look, and live in ev'ry nerve.

When ABBA'S son beheld the sails unfurl'd,
To hail the wonders of a western world,
Not all that hope pourtray'd, or fancy drew,
Could soothe the anguish of a last adieu.
Tho' future dreams of strange enchantments told,
And the rich treasures Science would unfold,
When at his call the sun of truth should smile
On the wild regions of his infant isle;
Tho' dear the impulse of the youthful breast,
That feels in bliss conferr'd supremely blest;
Yet dearer still to him those tender ties,
That most in sorrow's parting hour we prize;
That sad and cherish'd test, which nicely weighs
Each latent spring, which fond affection sways;
Unfolds the glories of her sacred sphere,
And bids the treasur'd scenes of life appear.
But while remembrance on each object hangs,
And separation sharpens all his pangs,
Could no kind spirit whisper in his ear,
The silent warnings of prophetic fear?
That in this favor'd clime, beyond the main,
Lurk'd fell disease, and death's funereal train.
Thus hid from human view, in mystic state,
The fatal sisters weave the web of fate.
In vain the restless spirit sighs to scan,
The secret maze that hides the life of man;
A dusky veil obscures the fading sight,
And wraps her embryo scenes in endless night.
O wise decree!  to bounded reason giv'n,
Too weak to judge the destinies of Heav'n:
For here, perhaps, had prosp'rous fortune smil'd,
And science crown'd simplicity's meek child,
The soft refinement of our polish'd art,
Blunting the finer movements of his heart,
No more with joy its past delights would trace,
Nor prize the virtues of a savage race;
But with regret bewail his comforts lost,
And knowledge purchas'd at contentment's cost.

Far as the eye from ANDES' heights explores
A waste of waters, and untrodden shores;
Where Superstition rears her giant head,
And tropic suns their burning splendors shed;
O'er trackless wilds, beneath whose covert shade
Love never smil'd, nor graceful Beauty play'd;
But ambush'd deep, and arm'd with deadly stings,
The venom'd snake its warning rattle rings;
Go, trace what charm th' untutor'd Indian won,
When first salvation's dawning glories shone;
Not the dear bliss on Seraph's wing to roam,
Thro' the bright regions of a world to come;
Nor the pure truth, in glowing language drest,
Of life immortal, and eternal rest;
But the sweet promise Revelation gave,
That happy spirits meet beyond the grave.
The only wish his simple nature knew;
The brightest paradise his fancy drew:
And as he faintly hail'd the rising light
Illume the heavy cloud of error's night,
Faith o'er his spirit pour'd her rays divine,
And Superstition bow'd to Mercy's shrine.

So when the sun's meridian lustre glows
On some tall mountain, wrapt in Alpine snows,
Its silver palaces, and crystal tow'rs,
By Fancy rear'd, in gay Enchantment's hours,
In streams pellucid gently melt away,
And bare its bosom to the blaze of day.

But let the feelings of the savage breast,
In ZELIA'S fate th' astonish'd mind arrest;
She by her sable beauty doom'd to prove
The boldest FRIENDSHIP, and the direst love;
Doom'd to proclaim, in passion's glowing tone,
What ardent spirits fire the torrid zone;
When warm in youth, and rich in manly grace,
Lions in courage, of the Negro race,
Heart bound to heart, ZEBRON and ZAB0R came,
And felt the pow'r of love's imperious claim.
A tender faith from earliest years they bore,
That eas'd the galling fetters slav'ry wore;
And as a brother shar'd a brother's toil,
They bless'd the chains which bound them to the soil;
Till with the fatal dart their bosoms strove,
And mutual anguish own'd their mutual love.
Then came the hitter conflict of the heart,
From the lov'd maid or cherish'd friend to part
Here ZABOR'S sighs proud ZEBRON'S love controul,
And wring to agony his lofty soul;
There tender ZABOR mourns his Friend's despair,
If pity yield, what honor must not share.
O spare that thought, distracted fondness cries,
Not mine the pang I fear, the bliss I prize
Here tears and groans their lab'ring grief reveal,
And vows of endless truth their union seal.
Wink thus in pensive agony they stray'd,
O trial too severe!  they meet the maid.
O wond'rous miracle!  in FRIENDSHIP'S cause,
Nature and sense suspend their sov'reign laws;
The storm is hush'd, the fierce desire supprest,
And passion silenc'd to eternal rest.
On her dear form they gaze with heavy sighs,
Weep tears of blood, and raise to Heav'n their eyes;
Alternate clasp her in their sable arms,
Alternate mourn her all-seducing charms;
And ere relenting love the blow could ward,
Deep in her bosom fix the fatal sword:
Pour forth their anguish in a last adieu,
And rush on death, to matchless FRIENDSHIP true.

Such the impetuous feelings of the breast,
By Nature's hand, in savage wildness, drest:
Bold, lawless, unrestrain'd, they revell'd here,
And made th' untutor'd heart their native sphere.
Yet in this jarring conflict of the soul,
This war of passions, bound by no controul,
That like the fierce Tornado's dreadful course,
Sweeps the wide plain with unresisted force;
Where devastation, with terrific form,
Howls thro' the blast, and revels in the storm;
E'en Love, immortal Love, whom all obey,
And Jealousy, which rules with tyrant sway;
And Hope, that ev'ry absent bliss supplies,
And life itself, with all that life can prize;
All here forgotten, or all here supprest,
The glorious triumph of the heart confest:
And FRIENDSHIP, smiling on this Indian Isle,
Proud of her conquest, deck'd their funeral pile.

From scenes like these, which holy grief o'erspreads,
We turn where Love a softer lustre sheds;
Where Science and Refinement, hand in hand,
Lead mild Philosophy's celestial band.
First, tender Pity!  soft'ning Sorrow's reign,
And Patience, meekly bearing ev'ry pain,
With all the Arts that humanize the mind,
And Charity, embracing all mankind;
And bright-ey'd Faith, intent on things divine,
And Passions, harmoniz'd at Mercy's shrine;
And Piety, that soars to realms above,
And yields its earthly to a heav'nly love;
Where the pure flame, from ruder feelings freed,
Shines all that man can wish, and God decreed.

FRIENDSHIP, blest pow'r!  to thee alone is giv'n,
To blend the vast extremes of earth and heav'n.
'Tis thine to soften thro' this boundless frame
Each jarring int'rest, and divided claim;
Discordant tastes in perfect union draw,
And bend revolting passions to thy law.
Tho' nature, prejudice, and clime oppose,
To make the sons of earth the bitt'rest foes,
'Tis thine with chains of adamant to bind
The rebel heart, and center mind in mind.

Long to her sons shall SCOTIA tell the tale
Of sister beauties, in fair Leadnoch's vale:
SCOTIA, who boasts her wild romantic glades,
And mountains lost in deep empurpled shades;
Whose tow'ring crags, by peals of thunder riven,
Bear the dark clouds, and court the storms of Heav'n.
Now threat'ning tempests from their haughty brow,
Or softly gleaming in the lakes below;
Where wizard Fancy, with her magic wand,
Still summons visions at her bold command.
Nurse of wild dreams, and superstitious fears,
That pierce the veil of long succeeding years,
To steal front life the joys that most we prize,
Or give to hope, what reason oft denies;
SCOTIA, where taste and feeling's sweetest child,
The Border Minstrel, pour'd his wood-notes wild,
O'er hills that erst with war and music wrung,
As FINGAL triumph'd, and as OSSIAN sung.

But here no glowing scenes, by genius drest,
No fancied woes the list'ning ear arrest;
But simple truth reflects her living rays
On the sad picture of departed days.
And long the soldier, resting on his arms,
The warbling fair, unconscious of her charms,
The thoughtful shepherd, whistling o'er the plains,
The prattling nurse, the infant's lisping trains,
Shall chant in rude traditionary lay,
The fate of BESSY BELL and MARY GRAY.

In these fair nymphs, from earliest life endear'd,
One mutual heart, one angel mind appear'd.
So oft the blushing sweets of Spring display
Two lovely blossoms on one parent spray;
That pair'd by Nature, equal beauty claim;
Their shades, their fragrance, and their growth the same.&mdash;
Scarce rose the wish, ere love its purport caught,
And sympathy divin'd the sister thought;
And while instinctive feeling play'd her fires,
As fancy dictates, and fond youth inspires,
The only hope their spotless hearts contest,
Was FRIENDSHIP in her boundless wishes blest;
That sacred gift, to kindred spirits giv'n,
Who taste on earth the bliss enjoy'd in heav'n.
Their's the fine form, to just proportion true,
As genius taught, and classic models drew;
Whose polish'd charms, with living graces stole
With sweet enchantment on th' enraptur'd soul.
Their's Beauty, in Simplicity's pure vest,
And Innocence, by artless Nature drest;
Th' angelic mildness of the gentle dove,
The look of Heav'n, and the soft smile of Love.
Here, too, the pride of ancestry might trace
The ancient lineage of a noble race
The pow'r that rul'd, the pomp that fill'd the earth,
With all the honors of dislinguish'd birth.
But in these scenes does Nature love to dwell?
Are these the strains her sweetest numbers swell?
More simple haunts her modest spirit sings,
Whose potent magic from affection springs.
Then why this theme pursue?  to her more dear
The tender sigh, and pity's melting tear:
The mutual wish, the fond endearing kiss,
The smile expressive of unsullied bliss;
More dear to her, when tripping o'er the plains,
These twins in FRIENDSHIP pour'd their artless strains,
When arm in arm, they sought their lov'd retreat,
The ivied summer-house, the moss-grown seat;
The scenes of infancy's enchanting hour,
Sweet spots, endear'd by recollection's pow'r;
Where youth her gay fantastic colors threw,
And mus'd on pleasures past, or pictur'd new;
And promis'd all that glowing hope desires,
Her warm wish kindled at affection's fires;
Thus the smooth current of their moments past,
In joys too bright for life, too pure to last.
When issuing from the earth's contagious springs,
The demon plague o'er SCOTIA spread his wings;
From angry clouds his dart malignant flung,
Bow'd the strong sinews, and the nerves unstrung:
Beauty and strength alike the havoc shar'd,
Nor age nor sex the fatal poison spar'd;
O'er sick'ning worlds the sure destruction spread,
And desolation revell'd midst the dead.
Then rank infection burst from ev'ry pore,
And dark suspicion clos'd the social door.
Then came the lonely hour, the ceaseless tear,
The stolen interview, and anxious fear;
The last embrace that wrings the bleeding heart,
And the dread stroke, more keen than death, to part.
But here the hope on which affection hangs,
Beguil'd the pow'r of sorrow's bitter pangs
Celestial dreams of youthful fancy glow'd,
And thus sweet MARY'S ardent feelings flow'd:

"Oh, that our love some hallow'd spot could find,
Sacred to spirits of congenial mind;
Some lone retreat, where no infectious breath
Pours on the chilling air the blast of death;
No fever rages in the throbbing veins,
No phrenzy tortures with delirious paths;
But hope to rapture tells her flatt'ring tale,
And health, exulting, wantons in the gale.
Content with what primaeval life supplies,
The turf our bed, our canopy the skies;
And if we sicken, this our dearest claim:
Our fate, our suff'ring, and our grave the same.
And as the fading lamp of life expires,
And from the earth the fleeting soul retires,
The deathless spirits of immortal love
Shall mingle ere they reach the realms above;
And Mercy, betiding from her native sky,
Bear the pure flame to meet its God on high.

"No more, no more," her fair companion cries,
This cherish'd wish our native clime supplies;
'Mid blooming LEADNOCH'S deep embow'ring trees,
This heav'n of rest prophetic fancy sees;
Where safe conceal'd, we'll fix our sylvan seat,
Hope's dear asylum, FRIENDSHIP'S last retreat;
For us the larch a verdant roof shall bend,
And the tall pine its spreading mantle lend;
And where keen winds and scorching suns pervade,
We'll twine the foliage of the aspen shade;
And weave with texture nice the bleeding thorn,
With roses glowing like the blush of morn."

Dear envied impulse of the youthful breast;
The bliss by fancy drawn, by hope possest.
Succeeding life a darker shadow throws,
And conjures future ills from former woes.
And here recording memory loves to trace
The simple beauties of this favor'd place;
The hawthorn spreading far its tufted shade;
The brook that rippled thro' the mantling glade;
The flow'ry dell, perfum'd with native sweets;
The rising hills, that shelter'd these retreats;
The tuneful lark, that pour'd his matin lay;
The wild rose blushing on its simple spray;
The river, rolling o'er its rocky bed,
Here dash'd in torrents, there in mirrors spread;
All that could health bestow, or life insure:
Fit haunts for love so true, for hearts so pure.

Now from their flowing vest the zone unbound,
Confines the boughs that float luxuriant round;
Here the light net, which tress'd their auburn hair,
With leaves entwin'd, excludes the chilling air;
There for their couch the velvet moss is spread;
Here fragrant violets on their pillow shed;
Fresh buds and blossoms pour their rich perfume,
In waving honors from the foliag'd dome;
Beneath whose hallow'd arch, by beauty rear'd,
No nymphs so fair and fond have since appear'd.

So blooming EVE, in Eden's happy hour,
Adorn'd with vernal sweets her nuptial bow'r;
Divine simplicity's enchanting grace,
And spotless innocence adorn'd her face;
Celestial music fill'd the tuneful grove,
And Nature smil'd with harmony and love.

But scarce the moon, whose heav'nly lamp adorns
Night's sable throne, had fill'd her silver horns,
When, as they rose to hail the blush of day,
Rous'd by the early lark's melodious lay,
With eye exploring, and with pensive mien,
O'er distant hills a highlander was seen;
A checker'd tartan, cross his shoulders flung,
Down his fine form in graceful foldings hung;
Whilst sportive zephyrs, on his brow of care,
Wav'd in the dazzling sun his golden hair.
With eager step he bounded o'er the vale,
His plumage nodding to the passing gale.
His quick approach the blushing maids descried:
'Twas the young RONALD, CALEDONIA'S pride,
Who, long enamour'd of the happy pair,
Oft wove the wreath that bound their flowing hair;
Or wooed the plaintive turtle from its nest;
Or cull'd the nosegay for their snowy breast;
His only pleasure on their steps to wait,
Friend of their hearts, and partner of their fate.
And as the sun its orient beauty shed,
And sweets ambrosial round the valley spread,
Its floating beams, that round the branches play'd.
Form'd at each passing breeze a chequer'd shade;
This fairy haunt, from vulgar gaze conceal'd,
To his fond search its sylvan guests reveal'd:
And mutual glances, messengers of love,
Confirm his triumph, and his doubts remove.
He stops, a rising blush o'erspreads his cheek,
And thus his trembling lips attempt to speak:

"O bright examples of unrivall'd truth!
Dear, lov'd companions of my happy youth!
If ever RONALD touch'd your gentle hearts;
If his pure faith one gen'rous wish imparts;
Here let him bear the toil, the danger share,
Your smiles his recompence, your life his care:
For you each morn the choicest fruits he'll bring,
Flow'rs from the mead, and crystal from the spring;
Climb the steep rock, explore the neighb'ring wood,
And dress with careful hand your simple food.
And when her shadows silent evening throws,
And wearied Nature sinks to soft repose,
Still hov'ring near, as love and nature free,
Rapture shall pour her wildest minstrelsy:
As dreams seraphic o'er your slumbers steal,
And heav'nly bliss to earthly guests reveal,
In the rude beauties of our native plains
To Fancy's eye shall EDEN bloom again;
And Angels hail, as time progressive rolls,
The spotless union of congenial souls."

He ceas'd, nor waited long the kind assent
Soft Pity to the pray'r of FRIENDSHIP lent.
Nor here let Modesty avert her eye,
Her bright cheek redd'ning with a deeper dye;
Here dwelt no thought that virtue should conceal,
But such as Saints and holy Angels feel;
No cruel glance that jealous passion flings;
No doubt, that tortures with a thousand stings;
But the pure intercourse of social thought,
Soul meeting soul, with sweetest transports fraught.
The gen'rous warmth confiding faith inspires,
And the firm trust that but with life expires;
And sympathy, that kindred bosoms sways,
Kindling to rapture feeling's latent rays.
As steel with flint the pow'r electric claims,
To rouse the spark that blazes into flames.

O fleeting hope, with vain delusion fraught!
Visions of happiness, too dearly bought!
The April ray, that gilds the early Spring;
The down that paints the butterfly's light wing;
Beauties that vanish if a cloud arise,
Are lasting to the transient joys we prize.
For while affection pour'd her hallow'd strains,
The fatal spoiler revell'd in his veins;
Faint and more faint the vital sparks supplied
The ebbing current of life's crimson tide;
The flutt'ring pulse its earthly mansion fled,
And RONALD sunk to mingle with the dead.
Barb'd with disease, the deadly poison flew,
In the last sigh his parting spirit drew.
And while the mournful fair with tears inhume
His pallid corse, and deck the rustic tomb,
Their fading forms announce the cruel foe,
Their trembling limbs the pious task forego;
Death o'er the closing scene his mantle cast.&mdash;
So droops the lilly at the wint'ry blast.
"Pass but a few short hours, this trial o'er,
We meet," fond MARY cried, "to weep no more."
The gentle BESSY clasp'd her to her heart:
"O blest indeed, not e'en in death to part;
O wait!  I follow to the realms of bliss!"
And seal'd her passport with a dying kiss.

But while these stars, so faintly seen below,
In better worlds with brighter lustre glow,
Say, does oblivion's silent shadow steal
O'er scenes so dear to hearts, that deeply feel?
No, the bold energies of souls sublime
Dispute their triumph o'er the wreck of time.
Tho' no proud trophy deck their lov'd remains,
The potent magic of affection reigns.
She, sweet enchantress, Nature's sov'reign queen,
Holds her mild empire o'er the shad'wy scene;
And in the mirror memory holds to view,
She bids their gentle virtues bloom anew.
Still thro' the shade of LEADNOCH'S verdant grove,
Responsive echoes tell the sighs of love;
The simple stream, to Scottish legends dear,
In soothing murmurs wakes the passing tear:
And ALMOND'S waves, impetuous in their course,
Pure as their FRIENDSHIP, ardent as its force,
Still roll in silent majesty along,
And claim the tribute of the poet's song.
Still heaving turfs, in gay luxuriance drest,
Spread their wild sweets o'er Beauty's mould'ring breast.
But say, ye spirits, whose blest pow'r controuls
The mystic wand'rings of departed souls,
Why no rais'd sods o'er RONALD'S ashes bloom?
Fears love a rival in the silent tomb?

Ah!  far beyond the mansions of the dead,
Hope lifts the veil that human blindness spread;
On Faith's triumphant wing her spirit soars,
And worlds of bliss thro' boundless space explores;
Where knit by Mercy in celestial bands,
To perfect love the social heart expands.
From the first hour Creation's wonders glow'd,
To where the light of Revelation flow'd;
From Brutes to Man, from Man to God we trace,
One glorious system of Almighty grace.
Celestial harmony all Nature fills;
Earth's secret caves resound it to the hills;
The hills re-echo to each vale and grove;
The groves and vallies to the vaults above;
Seraphic spirits catch the choral strain,
And Angels mingle with the joyful train.
He comes, be comes, "Let the floods clap their hands,"
And bear the tidings to remotest lands.
He bursts the bonds by superstition wrought,
To darken reason, and entangle thought;
With Mercy breaks Oppression's iron rod,
And leads from love of Man, to love of God.
And to the doubtful terrors of the mind
Proclaims this truth:  Salvation to mankind.

Angels of glory!  strike your sacred lyres!
And write a Saviour's love in hallow'd fires;
The Son of God reveals his dazzling light;
Spirits of mortal FRIENDSHIPS, veil your sight!
And, wrapt in wonder, gratitude, and love,
Leave earthly ties, and soar to realms above.

Ah!  not alone in mercy to our race,
The boundless charities of Christ we trace;
But in those gentler offices, that charm
The ills of life, and grief and pain disarm;
In all that pity breathes, and hope desires,
Compassion feels, and holy love inspires;
In JOHN, the lov'd disciple of his heart;
In MARY too, who chose the better part;
In all his deeds to pardon and to save;
In buried LAZ'RUS, rising from the grave;
In MARY MAGDALEN'S repentant tear;
In his last charge to filial pity dear;
In the forgiving pray'r, that mark'd his death,
When Mercy trembled on his parting breath;
And in the precious boon to mortals giv'n,
The bread of life, the cheering cup of Heav'n,
Ere with his blood he sealed Redemption's plan,
And died himself, to save rebellious Man.
