"Look down, O Peter!  on thy quaking church,
With dangers compass'd in an impious land;
Tho' Satan buffets with a scourge of birch,
O let him not prevail against thy band
But help thy godly-serving men in search,
How their colleaguing haters to withstand."
So in his oriel kneeling, much dismayed,
To the key-bearing saint, Archbishop Chichley prayed.

"Well may the clergy heed a fearful rent,
Their snares while Wickliffe and his lollards lay,
And ruffian nobles in the parliament,
Prepare a bill to take the lands away,
Which on religious houses have been spent;
For only laymen's lands, these glozers say,
Can stand the realm instead for its defence.
Has England aught to fear?  their plea is sly pretence."

"Could our new king, blest patron, but be mov'd
To wage a war with those Clementine French,
Who from his chair the Romish Father shov'd,
Such stirring spirits gloriously might quench
Their thirst of plunder any where belov'd,
And for thine only church new regions wrench.
If thou wilt help, vouchsafe me now a sign."
Thus pray'd he, kneeling still before his pictur'd shrine,

When lo!  the painted eyeballs in consent
Seem'd to bend down, and glisten with a smile;
The frounces of the hoary brow forwent;
Smooth were the forehead's wrinkles for a while,
The brinded curls shook, and more forward bent;
Odors of spikenard the sooth'd sense beguile;
The pillars of the taper'd altar nod;
The steps of marble sweat, as past an unseen god.

Uprose the archbishop full of inward fire,
And ties the sandals to his stately feet,
Covers his vest with purple wide attire,
And sleeves of lawn by ladies plaited neat;
His shaven crown he carries a head higher,
While acolytes his dress of pomp compleat.
"Unlock my cedar-chest; the mitre bring,"
He said, "I go to parliament to meet the king."

Nor had saint Peter heeded not the prayer,
For to saint George he said, "Your English king
Thinks the French lilies sure beneath his care;
Now while the almighty Trine their judgments fling,
And round the monarch fiends of madness glare,
And giant factions hourly firebrands fling,
That he forbears a tilting match to try,
The wrath of seventy years is more than half gone by.

"Let not your conscience feel a weight of qualms,
If a few cripples, maim'd by hacking war,
Have at the convent-doors to sue for alms,
And many a brave heart bleeds to death afar,
The mortal penalty of reaping palms;
Most, if they stay, this lollardly would mar,
And, 'stead of purgatory's ending fire,
Would steep their tortur'd souls in ever-burning ire."

"We soldiers must not heed the pangs of men;
At the last judgment all will be set right;"
Replies saint George, and, gliding from the ken
Of the immortal denizens of light,
Over beclouded France he hovers then,
And next to British Leicester bends his flight,
Where peers and squires, at Henry's call, attend,
The needful laws to make, and grievances amend.

Shap'd like the duke of Burgundy, the saint,
From a white horse, before the palace-gate,
Is seen to alight, as if with journeying faint;
Cherubs in form of lackeys swell his state,
Talking in broken English loud and quaint;
The duke their master's business cannot wait.
Up the broad stairs descending ushers groom,
Low-bowing the strange knight to Henry's presence-room.

"Worthy to spring from Philip named the Fair,
Worthy in Poictiers' field to couch a lance,
Young king, henceforth my king, the rights who heir,
Your fathers claimed and conquered over France,
Its sceptre from our crazy tyrant tear.
You know the wrongs I bear from Orleans;
You know my force and yours.  Come.  Harfleur
My liegeman governs.  Now or never strikes the hour."

Before the nobles round he spake aloud,
And made obeisance to the heark'ning king;
Kindling within his youthful fancy proud,
Scorn of repose, desire of conquering,
Visions of glory, shining as a cloud,
Where radiant angels clustering sit and sing
To sainted shades, from Eden's palms entic'd,
The deeds of them that freed the sepulchre of Christ.

But Henry gave with caution this reply:
"My father's crown our people's choice has lent;
A king of England, noblest Burgundy!
Is but the servant of his parliament;
If they for war (our meeting time is nigh,)
With the hereditary foe are bent,
Myself will breast the fight, and think it sport:
God and my right, I feel the courage to support.

"Meanwhile, in rank and honour please your grace
With my most loyal dukes of England class;
This my own palace be your dwelling place.
But hark!  the bell already tolls for mass
If on our public forms you wish to gaze,
For to the senate-hill from church we pass,
With Exeter's brave .on the gallery climb.
Holland!  to you, we leave our noble guest a time."
END OF THE FIRST SITTING.


Up the high street proceeds the kingly way,
With yellow gravel, smoothly freshly strown:
Rushes and fragrant sedges scatter'd lay,
By smiling girls in white from baskets thrown,
With many a painted flower of gardens gay,
Like the enamel'd soil of Eden sown
But sweeter far, for from the windows round
A thousand women gaz'd, a thousand voices sound.

Tapestries are stretch'd along the gaudier wall,
Where'er the royal retinue slow wind.
"The king," "the king," exulting whispers call.
From each balcony him alone they mind;
And mark his white and nodding plumes so tall,
And the old diadem, with velvet lin'd,
Rich sparkling in the sun, and his long train,
Scarlet with ermine fac'd, and borne by pages twain.

Their snowy handkerchiefs the ladies shook,
Sent, with the finger-tip, their kisses bland,
And stretch'd their swanny necks to woo a look,
Or graceful welcome from his floating hand.
A fairer shape, they murmur, never took
An angel sent by the immortal band:
And how he steps!  not so majestic trod
Saint Christopher beneath the burden of his God.

In the great church another people bends.
Tho' added choirs in measur'd song agree;
Tho' pomp its silk and gold and silver blends,
And priests, in new array, have bent the knee;
Tho' an archbishop, lordly clad, attends,
Chichley, who sat in Canterbury's see;
In vain the tapers blaze, the censers swing,
All eyes the altar quit to fasten on the king.

When the bell tinkled, and the hushing crowd
Kneel'd in a moment, and the priest, awestruck,
As at the presence of the Highest, bow'd,
Henry the crown from his broad forehead took
As down his peachy cheek the brown curls flow'd,
And danc'd the lustre of his restless look,
With hallow'd love they scan his face so fair,
His parted brows, hawk nose, and lips &mdash; a cherry pair.

His chest and shoulders broad the warlike throng
With their tried worthies of the field compare:
His channel'd wrist, as wing'd Zethiel's strong,
Who bore Habakkuk by the golden hair
From Carmel far Euphrates' stream along.
Proud of their handsome prince well pleas'd they stare:
And, when its final lay the organ pours,
God-save-the-king from all in heart-felt chorus soars.

Into a cloister, sharp-arch'd over head,
After the worship, steps the royal band,
Echo retrampling every gritty tread.
They praise the fret-work carv'd on either hand,
And stout the monkish rimes else aye unread,
Until a postern upstairs shall expand
To the shire-hall, where duly ranged anon,
Thro' foldlng-doors below, the peers and squires are gon.

Henry walks in.  All bow.  The guards retire,
"My lords and gentlemen, &mdash; to me 'tis known
That powerful noblemen of France desire
Again to hold their lands of th' English crown,
As heretofore was done; but they require
An arm'd protection, out of usage grown:
Is it your pleasure at the public charge
To grant this aid, or leave our ancient claims at large?"

"Let not the boldness of my speech offend,"
Chichley began, "most gracious sovereign hear.
'Tis seemly for the younger man to lend
E'en to the prate of age a patient ear:
Oft from the mumbling lip, slow-join'd, descend
Words not unwise, nor stain'd by hope or fear;
Time, if no blythe companion, counsels well;
Greybeards for camp unfit may in advice excel.

"Shall France, asunder torn by inward broils,
Sue to her neighbour for a worthy chief;
While England from the glorious grant recoils,
Nor dares unclench the hand of her relief;
Glad that a sea on her safe border boils,
Who once could hold remote Guienne in fief?
March toward the Pyrenees.  Again abroad.
Cressy and Poitiers lie along the well track'd road,

"Pent in a petty isle, shall Henry sleep,
Whose father won in arms a mighty realm,
His conquer'd rights in base oblivion steep;
To sit carousing at a flickering helm?
Men train'd to arms shall kings of England keep,
Nor know their country's foes to overwhelm?
We'll wade, if we want ships the waves to skim,
With one hand hold the sword, with the other swim.

"Methinks I see, beside that royal chair,
Stand the Black Prince, an armed shape of smoak,
Athwart his grated vizor griesly glare,
Gage his successor with a climbing look,
For the first time content with England's heir,
Yet jealous of the rival he must brook.
He marshals thee the way that we should go,
France shrinks at Edward's name, to Henry's let her bow.

"Call not thy means of enterprise too light:
With men and mind all other things are won,
Our lives and fortunes are our country's right,
To serve our king we covet every one.
A common cause the clergy will not slight;
The church is ever proud to prop the throne;
And offers aid the weight of war to lift,
Her alien priories, an ample willing gift.

"Let but the noble order bleed as free
As from her veins of gold the loyal church,
And such a spirit shall enkindled be,
As leaves all former trophies in the lurch.
Is every glittering eye around I see
The cheering earnest of concurrence perch.
O could this wrinkled hand unlearn to sag,
I'd go; and from this crosier shake the union flag."

Hurrah!  with an involuntary joy,
At once the warfare-loving gentry shout,
Or with swift-drumming feet the ear annoy.
Stiff-knee'd some stand, as risen to march out;
Some, clapping, hail the thought of bold employ;
Their hilts same grasp, with breasts up swelling stout;
And all on Chichley gaze with thankful glee,
And the king's beaming smile with thrilling ardor see.

But Ralph, the Earl of Westmoreland, arose
"'Tis vain beyond the sea more lands to win,
While false allies our northern shires inclose.
War, but with Scotchmen, let us first begin:
Strong, we hear homage; weak, we feel them foes.
France can at pleasure land her strength within
Our very isle, while they disown our sway:
Stak'd on their misty heaths let England's banner play.

"Why of one cherry make two bites?" outcries
Old Exeter, with scorn and anger hoarse:
"Your Scotland wholly on the French relies;
Conquer but them, her crownet sinks of course.
France pays the piper, when with naked thighs
Stride from their hills in arms the brass-hair'd boors.
Strike at the heart at once; to France, say I."
To France first, first to France, the Commons loud reply.

"If you take prisoner any noble Scot,
And bring him safely to your castle hold,
What is his ransom worth &mdash; a single jot?
He has no casks of wine, no plate, no gold,
Put some lean cattle, which would shame the pot,
Which English thieves would leave upon the wold.
I like strong claret in my captive's place,
Nor ever fear'd to look a Frenchman in the face."

Applause revives.  All cry, To France, to France!
And Westmoreland unseconded remain'd.
Toward Exeter the crowding chiefs advance,
Shake his rough hand, or nod with glee unfeign'd.
So, when their dingy load of boughs askance
Huge bonfires first their cones of flame up-send,
The boys throng round them, glad with heart and voice,
The crackling faggots push, and in the blaze rejoice.

Then Henry said, "My lords and gentlemen,
Your loyalty will not forsake the crown
In the recovery of its old domain.
To treat for the delivery of our own,
Of Gascony, and Normandy, and Mayne,
I shall dispatch a messenger anon.
Meanwhile (the prayer of kings unarm'd who heed?)
Equip your vassals all, and to Southampton speed."

The king retiring, the assembly broke,
Wishing each other joy of what was done.
Lord Westmoreland directly undertook,
With fourscore men in arms, to send his son.
"I'll not be left behind," young Suffolk spoke.
"I shall attend my king," says Huntingdon.
Warwick pledg'd seventy men at his own charge
Northumberland fourscore, each with a pike and targe.

Fifty tried archers and a hundred bows
Stafford declares his willingness to bring.
Thirty-six horse Lord Willoughby bestows.
Berkeley and Burnell fast together cling;
From either friend an equal offer flows,
With forty swordsmen each to meet the king.
The levy comes to shape with some debate:
According to their rank, barons and earls they rate.

And, as the nobles knot by knot retire
To their carousal rooms, from the shire-hall,
The youths about run to them full of fire
My lord, take me; and me; do take us all
A single heart, a thousand hands aspire
To lay the Frenchmen out for funeral,
Delighted in the people's praise and zeal,
With many a bumper-toast the knights prolong their meal.
END OF THE SECOND SITTING.


Here seems to he a lacuna in the manuscript we are permitted to transcribe.  Whether the next canto was never entirely versified or not versified to the satisfaction of the unfortunate author, it is not now extant.  From an argument or sketch of the entire fable, which remains, it must have narrated an application of the seeming Duke of Burgundy to Archbishop Chichley for an ecclesiastic companion of his return to France, to serve as interpreter between him and the English.  The miraculous arrival of this Abbe Cauchon at the quarters of the Duke of Burgundy puts every thing in France in the same situation as if the real duke had come.

The council of this war in London met,
Their means and meaning quietly discust:
Chichley and other clergy of his set
Are of the board, to warrant all things just,
And raise supplies by aid or tax or debt.
They bid the king to them for income trust:
Chalice and pyx the church in pawn will lay,
Rather than one brave man shall miss his promis'd pay.

Their messengers to every port are sent,
From Milford-Haven to the mouth of Tweed,
That for Southampton shipping might be tent.
The passage thence is made with skaiter's speed;
Thence in a lucky hour great Edward went;
And there the meeting place is now decreed.
Nobles, who the late Leicester session slighted,
To join the enterprise by summons are invited.

St. George, for England ever on the watch,
On the west minster takes, at night, his stand,
And calls the cherubs who to him attach:
Fluttering assembles the wing-headed band,
Like doves before their natal cote of thatch
Coiling in sweepy rings with cooings bland.
Phosphoreal lustre beaming from their hair,
As if with glow-worms gemm'd, bewrays their faces fair.

"Swift to our havens (so he spake), repair.
Where'er a new-rigg'd vessel waits the wind,
Ready with stores the English troops to bear,
Perch not unwelcome on the poop behind,
And swell its canvass with celestial sir:
Each other soon at Plymouth you must find.
No blasts to bare the coral groves below;
As when you trumpet praise to dying martyrs, blow.

"Nine nimble-wing'd off to Newcastle fly,
For the nine boys of unabating use,
Which drubb'd the Danish pirates valiantly.
Who sought to sack them under way for Sluys.
Six more by Hull in the broad Humber lie,
With tawny sails, in Holland stain'd so spruce.
Five herring-smacks at Yarmouth join your throng,
And near the land-guard fort two Baltic traders strong.

"At Rochester let seven with tough cheeks meet.
The George, the Bonaventure, the Expense,
The Royal Henry, hugest of the fleet,
The Antelope, the Elephant, mad Defense,
All ships of war, the side of Medway beat,
Eager to start; and after parting thence,
Along the coast of France may boldly sweep,
To still what hostile force lurks in the road of Dieppe.

"Eight ships to mother Avon bid adieu,
Ere they their sherris wines in Bristol coop.
A gentle puff will waft the Hare from Loo,
And skim the southern coast of every sloop;
A breath the Blazing Star from Plymouth woo,
To rack at anchor with the gathering group:
Away!" &mdash; In clouds the cherubs disappear'd;
A rush of wandering winds, a seethe of waves, is heard.

But soon Saint George another shape puts on.
Like an old man, he mingles in the crowd,
Tells that a war with France is fix'd upon,
Laments that years his tottering back have bow'd, 
Boasts that abroad he once an ensign won,
And bristles still with Edward's notice proud:
"It hung for years suspended in the quire,
And all the village girls would of my deeds inquire.

"Boy, (he goes on) I've heard your grandsire say,
Where once he chanc'd an English archer see
Shoot at a Frenchman, lurking in his way,
And through the body pin him to a tree.
On men of old a king his crown might lay.
In my young time there were strong fellows:  we,
If with an axe we at a foe let drive,
Morion and scalp down to the teeth could rive."

Of fleer, and taunt, and gibe, he cannot tire;
Still at the foe he is hurling angry blame:
His tongue like his own dragon's seems of fire,
To hiss with venom, and to dart with flame.
Hate of the French he hastens to inspire,
And all the warrior passions to inflame;
Daring, and scorn of rest, and hope of fame,
And zeal for church and king, and England's cherish'd name.

The gathering rabble, wheresoe'er he walks,
Dog his slow step, and catch his welcome tale,
Or stop, and make a it, the while he talks.
Yon drags him to a booth to swallow ale,
Asks about France, and full of wisdom stalks
To tell in other groups the glad regale.
'Tis war again, each gossip says, and laughs,
"Confusion to the French" each in his tankard quaffs.

Comes there a dusty traveller from far,
He must report his neighbour's marching zeal.
The tongues of all are moulding words of war;
Who turn a corner, bid each other wheel.
He only passes for the parish star,
Who couthly strains the bow, or thrusts the steel.
"Work they that will;" tir'd porters cry, "we go;"
As from their sweating backs the ponderous pack they throw.

Only the blacksmith has no time for news;
Weapons and targes he must forge for sale.
His jumping hammer bangs, his shrill fiile mews,
Hauberks he colls, or rivets coats of mail,
Or the bright sword-blade in his oven blues.
His heaving bellows blow a steady gale;
The grindstones sparkle whirl'd in grating gyre
To whet the horse-shoes shap'd to spear-heads in his fire.

In gay caparisons afar prepared
Their steeds the gentry train upon the heath;
From crest to spur no showy coat is spared;
Their arms and legs vanbras and cuisses sheath.
The trumpet's blast, the matchlock's pounce, unscar'd
The coursers hear, and snort with scorny breath;
Against a stand of pikes, now close, now large,
Sham skirmishes they wage, and prance in mimic charge.

Steeples and towers with ensigns are enrich'd,
And mended banners billow in the sky;
Tents and pavilions through the park are pitch'd,
Some calk the seams, and some the stake-loops tie.
Those with the love of archery bewitch'd,
At a huge turnip their new arrows try;
These their broad-swords, and battle-axes, prove,
Slash at a malkin stump, or hack the splintering grove.

Anew the weighty cannons mounted are,
And with rope-harness scud the artillery grounds;
The engineers, eyeing their blots afar,
Essay the powder, poize the iron rounds,
Or span the arching path of the petar.
Polish'd and hot, the dodging ball rebounds;
At every shot, panes clatter, quake the walls,
And thro' a thousand streets the roving thunder brawls.

At length, 'tis known the King removes his force,
And the train'd bands at once are on the wing;
Ill speeds the man, who northward bends his course,
Ever with files of foot encountering,
Or turn'd aside by dust-uptrampling horse.
Victuals, where'er they halt, the people bring,
Hail their brave brethren with a fond acclaim,
Shake hands, and with success, and d&mdash;n the Frenchman's name.

In every street the passengers descry
Some father bidding farewel to his son:
Brother to brother nods the last good-by'e:
Friends to take leave of one another run,
Girls reach their hands, as the loved youths pass by,
Swallowing a grief, which to reveal they shun.
Here for papa's God-bless-you the child kneels:
The wife sucks in a tear with the last kiss she feels.

The mother long sits weeping:  but the son
Has soon forgot his momentary pang;
Cheering the sultry way with tales of fun,
Planning with the French black-eyed girls to gang,
The lads march blythe, for all the August sun,
On their hot morions silver'd oak-boughs hang,
And, where the bush to some hedge ale-house points,
They drain the foamy mug, and bench their weary joints.
END OF THE FOURTH SITTING.


On the church, steeple of Saint Margaret,
To see the English troops from England torn,
A bevy of she saintesses are met
Each in her shrine on angel-shoulders borne
Swoop'd from the higher heaven in gliding state,
To gaze with melting eye, and inly mourn.
A glow of northern lights and shooting stars
Mortals below behold, and augur bloody wars.

First to Southampton came the men of Kent.
An armed hand above a forest rear'd
On many a targe the painters had besprent,
And on their ensign ladies work endear'd:
With it the word "Unconquer'd" proudly went.
Before them strode their earl, as yet unfear'd,
One day he hopes for deeds a motto bear,
Since Harold's day of fate his fathers chose to wear.

The Hampshiremen have met them as they came
Three lions passant banner'd they expand,
As Bevis bore, the eldest son of fame,
And guide their brothers to the tented sand.
Next peers the checquer'd flag of Nottingham,
Where Robin Hood the bowyer has his stand.
'Twas well with England, when, in every shire,
Men dar'd to right their wrongs, nor fear'd a lordling's ire.

New stores and troops arrive with every hour.
The lugging baggage-Waggons oxen drag.
Down the north road see men of Oxford pour
A white bull wading, pictur'd on their flag.
Richard de Vere, their earl, of knights the flower,
Whom college metres made in Latin brag,
Their chaplain for a master clerk they hold,
Who deftly means to pen the deeds he shall behold.

The Cornishmen, for wrestling famous long,
With wrestlers blazon'd on their banners tall,
Heard echoing far their hollow hills among,
Above ground, under ground, brisk honor's call;
Forth they are sallied many hundreds strong
From their tin-mines, to bide the sun-beams gall,
Jabbering king Arthur's and St. Agnes' praise;
Their Earl Godolphin's will who but with joy obeys?

A crowd of Welshmen, arm'd with their long knives,
By David Gam, the never-flinching, led,
Fond of their leeks, but reckless of their lives,
Hopeful of booty, to Southampton sped.
Each can repeat whence his descent derives,
To Taliessin back, and Lhevoed,
Like an old Druid harping, Israel's king,
Who sang the Lord of Hosts, drawn on their flag they bring.

With clothes and armure wrought in curious frame,
To music timely stepping all as one,
Conjoin'd with Middlesex, the Londoners came,
By the red cross, and eke the dagger, known;
(To glory in the assassin's badge, O Shame
In Walter's fall to glory &mdash; hearts of stone!)
Pick'd men, most graceful, buxom, debonair,
They seek the applauding gaze, and eye the simpering fair.

And hundreds more, of whom Saint George would tell
To Saint Cecilia all the broider'd show,
Hoping that she some human breast would swell
With strong desire to blazon here below,
Bywords that die not in the lonely cell,
The feats that girt with palm each daring brow.
And she would hearken, dumb, with glistening eye,
Then play the march they stepp'd in heavenlier minstrelsy.

Some in the black friars' monastery slept;
For them the monks had room'd their eating hall,
Off the brick floor the scatter'd rushes swept,
And hid with heaps of straw the abbot's stall.
E'en in the chapel watch unwont is kept.
Where Borrow kneel'd, the snoring soldiers sprawl.
Some in the parson's barn with rats are pent;
Some on the pebbly beach are forc'd to pitch the tent.

The men of Durham, who arriv'd the last,
Long was their way o'er many a moss and wold,
Went to the mole, where lay some vessels fast,
And march'd at once on-board, like sheep to fold,
Their mitred banner flutter'd in the blast,
'Til they were cross the plank, and stow'd in hold:
There let them burr and oy, while tow'd aside,
Their ship forsakes the pier, and falls down with the tide.

More ships succeed, and quit the shouting shores:
Three cheers each jolly crew at parting asks:
Crowds lend a hand to heave aboard the stores
Upcrane the cannon, roll the water casks,
Fetch the cramm'd knapsacks for the eager goers,
And warm their ardor from the brandy-flasks.
Some promise to upclimb the light-house spire,
To catch the last last view, or feed the far-seen fire.

The Royal Henry was too huge to moor
If, lest than gun-shot of the pile-propt kay;
In boats, where music tim'd the swashing oar,
The king and chosen comrades put to sea:
They wave their helmets to the crouded shore,
And join a head, with undissembled glee,
Slow-floating forth the triple-masted launch:
Snores her descending sail, and swells its milk-white paunch.

At first they stagger on the rocking deck,
Catch the shrouds, or to the long boat spring,
Thence to the lessening throng repeat their beck,
Shout, or "Saint George for England" gaily sing;
Or on some green sequester'd woody speck,
And the white but beneath, far-gazing cling,
Which past the dying eye shall flit again;
'Twas on dear England's soil, but ah!  regret is vain.
END OF THE FIFTH SITTING.


The floating pomp our royal Henry leads,
And pitchy ships pursue in long array;
On either side the bluer land recedes,
Sails after sails their whitening wings display,
O'er the green wave a shriller north wind speeds,
And swifter sends the hovering foam away
Ere set of sun they make the Isle of Wight,
And land and day at once forsake the weary sight.

On Catharine Point St. George majestic stood,
Tall as he moves in regions of the blest
Among archangels &mdash; meditating good.
Th' ethereal flame that glittered on his crest,
To human eyes the light-house of the flood,
Sprinkled with ruddy stars the ocean's breast:
His voice of song, too vast for mortal ear,
Thro' their crystalline caves the vibrant billows bear.

"Ye British sisters, who, at Conan's call,
Forsook your homes to wed the Armoric youth;
Whom heathen pirates bound in cruel thrall,
But vainly wooed from chastity and truth
Ye sainted virgin martyrs, doom'd to fall
In beauty's prime, by swords that knew no ruth;
Whose corses, bleeding on the Belgic shore,
The angel of the tides to holier burial bore:

"Come from the marble caves, ye now bedwell
Round the lov'd isle where first ye drank the air;
Whether ye kindly pile the foodful shell,
Where toiling fisherman shall soon repair;
Or ring below the sinking sailor's knell,
And chaunt a requiem round his.  oozy bier;
Or mingle amber with the waves of storm;
Or on the moonlight deep your hymning circles form;

"Aid your avengers way."  The choir convenes
At his known, voice, from every jetty cell.
Thro' the clear surge a bubbling lustre greens,
Pale as of stars when midnight fogs dispel.
The sister myriad, and their thousand queens,
Their morses turn, and urge their cars of shell,
The billows with their pearled wrists divide,
Shoot thro' the deep, or skim along the buoyant tide.

Round the black ships in pattering groupes they flow,
Beside, beneath, in plunging dances wheel,
Hawl with their golden hair the lingering prow,
On ivory shoulders heave the labouring keel,
With oary thighs in measured effort row,
Or spurn the dimpled wave with sprawling heel
Some to the moon their snowy bosoms bare,
And float in mimic sleep where lurks the sandy snare.

At dawn the fleet attains the mouth of Seine,
When, lo returning twilight dims the air,
Thunders in cataracts tumble o'er the main,
And zigzag lightnings on the waters glare.
Couch'd on the shore his head and shoulders twain,
Upheaves a giant shape, whose haggard hair
Half-blasted lilies bound, and frowning said:
"Forbear my realm."  The nymphs St. Denis knew, and fled.

Scouts with light nags, the country to descry,
In the long boats are ferried first to land;
Their beckon intimates no ambush nigh.
Anon the armed men are row'd astrand.
The king is foremost &mdash; soon he climbs on high
The shelt'ring hill, and eager takes his stand,
Where he can view Harfleur the flinty-wall'd,
And to his comrades thus in sprightly accents call'd.

"A mine of gold within yon walls is near&mdash;
Each with his sword must dig himself a part;
He that has friends provide the means of cheer,
He that has debts display an honest heart.
Spare the religious with a holy fear;
To women, to the aged, cause no smart.
'Tis for our own, our country's right, we strive;
Down with the haughty foe, the suppliant leave alive.

"Into three parts the army shall divide,
On each main road distinct approaches make,
Succour, if nigh, will seek the eastern side,
There be my post &mdash; the west let Suffolk take,
And Clarence on the northern causeway guide.
Food must not pass us.  Let the sailors stake
The shallows of the stream, and guard the deep,
And every boat with men or victuals, seize and keep.

"Berkeley and Burnell, you together stroll'd
Through this fair land in gay and wanton state,
Be now my spokesmen &mdash; the white flag unroll'd,
The trumpet sounding parley at the gate,
The herald clad in violet as of old,
Go &mdash; bid them take my mercy ere too late;
Else shall Harfleur become a heap of stones,
Her halls a charnel-house to hold their owners bones.
END OF THE SIXTH SITTING.
