What new-raised pile, by modern art displayed,
Gleans 'mid yon ancient towers of tottering stone,
And mocks with glare profane the sacred shade,
By hoary Time o'er the dim Ruins thrown?

Stay, impious hand!  the rude design forbear!
Let not the builder on that spot intrude,
Where erst Religion poured her secret prayer,
And Learning claimed the peaceful solitude,

Ah!  spare the feelings of a youthful breast,
That mourns Antiquity's neglected pile,
Nor wound the fond ideas long imprest
By pious musings thro' the vaulted isle.

Oft have I loved, by brooding Fancy led,
To haunt the confines of the solemn scene,
What time still eve her dusky mantle spread,
And tinged with deeper hue the distant green.

There have I loved the faint remains to trace
Of many an antique room, and many a cell,
Where scarce a stone, thro' all the grass-grown space,
Survives, its ancient site and form to tell.

Here HENRY, in more zealous days long past,
His gifts of rich munificence bestowed,
And reared, amid th' uncultivated waste,
The holy Monast'ry's majestic load.

Here too, with orison and tapered rite,
In his own fane the Monarch's corse was laid;
And high his plumed helm and banners bright
Glittered aloof beneath the raftered shade.

And round, inshrined in consecrated mould,
Lay many a mitred Father of the place,
Whose steady rule these subject seats controlled,
And swayed, with mildest care, the studious race.

But, pleased our search to cheat, destroying Time
Has torn each relic from the walls away;
No moss-grown monument, or half-spelt rhyme,
Their secret tombs and mouldering bones betray.

Far from the world, within these walks confined,
To solitude a peaceful life was given:
The hand of Science humanized the mind,
And pure Religion winged the soul to Heaven.

Here sage Instruction o'er a darkened land
Her lessons far diffused of wisest lore;
While Hospitality, with loaded hand,
And smiling Plenty, oped the crowded door.

Shall then the bones of buried Saints be torn
With rudest insult from their sacred tomb,
And o'er the ruined isles and graves forlorn
The dreary Prison shed unhallowed gloom?

Shall then unfeeling Vice pollute these towers
With hoarse Impiety's tumultuous train?&mdash;
Shall Ignorance here waste th' unlettered hours,
And sullen guilt brood o'er his midnight chain?

Here warm Devotion once, in notes of praise,
Oft bade the faithful vow to Heaven arise,
Oft in full service poured her chanted lays,
And led the pomp of solemn sacrifice.

Full oft the passenger at evening slow,
By THAMES'S marge, or KENNET'S neighbouring bound,
Would stop to hear the pealing organs blow,
Or catch the loud Hosannah's sacred sound.

But now no breast, inflamed with pious heat,
Shall hymn the Maker in his hallowed fane.
Far, far Devotion flies th' unkindly seat,
And Infidelity usurps her reign.

Far other echoes with unholy sound
Shall now the shuddering passenger assail:
The song of ribaldry shall roar around,
And frequent curses load the nightly gale.

Here Hist'ry once her faithful annals wrought,
And Poetry oft planned the Minstrel's tale.
Here wrapt Philosophy in musing thought
O'er the dim taper kept her vigils pale.

But now no arts these altered seats reveal,
Save where, yon melancholy cells within,
Reluctant toil shall ply the drowsy wheel,
Or urge the busy hammer's ceaseless din.

No more with storied tints the tapestried hail
Presents the pious vow and famed crusade;
But Indolence around the furrowed wall
Full many a shapeless figure has portrayed.

Where once the slender-shafted window rose,
With pictured forms of hoary saints arrayed,
Now frowns the narrow grate, and sternly throws
On each dim wall a solitary shade.

Ye loved ideas, then, that once would rise,
To soothe the pensive bosom, all adieu!
Since from the scene each ancient image flies,
And sights unclassic haunt th' indignant view.

Farewell; the Cross, oft seen with holy gaze;
Farewell, the altar's incense-breathing pile;
The choir's deep melody, the taper's blaze;
The twilight cloister, and resounding isle!

Thus, while she marks, the change with drooping head,
Sad Fancy pours around her plaintive lay,
And sorrowing views the fairy visions fled,
That graced Antiquity's romantic day!
