Hail, Spirit of the soul!  whose hallow'd fire
With heav'nly rapture warms my trembling lyre;
Come on thy radiant pinions, dipt in dews,
Rich and resplendent as Aurora's hues,
Dawning like her, whose promis'd rays impart
The glow that cheers, the hope that fills the heart;
Come, paint in vivid colors, snatch'd from heav'n,
This purest boon to erring mortals giv'n,
This all-sustaining, all-reviving pow'r,
That sooth'd our drooping Parents' fallen hour;
And o'er the drear and barren waste of earth
A new Creation waken'd into birth;
And brought a second Eden to their view,
When Innocence had bid the world adieu.

Immortal FRIENDSHIP!  in thy bright career,
Exulting rapture plac'd thy triumph here:
'Twas thine to soothe the suff'rers' deep disgrace,
And whisper comfort for their future race;
Breathe o'er the wounded soul thy halcyon strain,
And bid the trembling spirit live again;
When, ere relenting Mercy calm'd their fears,
Ere hope of pardon shone thro' sorrow's tears;
When, mingling dread with dread, and grief with grief,
They found in mutual love their last relief.

So the sweet woodbine, batter'd by the storm,
The tempest past, uprears her fragile form;
Bow'd, yet not broke, in beauty blooms again,
And sheds reviving fragrance o'er the plain.

Thus the poor dove, when thunder shakes the air,
On trembling wing escapes the cruel snare;
Plumes the soft feathers of her ruffled breast,
And shelters safe within her native nest.

Visions of early life, ere yet ye fade,
Let my light pen arrest your fleeting shade;
Oh!  hither bring the scenes of op'ning youth,
Stampt with the seal of innocence and truth;
The school-day partner of my joys and fears,
Whose long affection, sanctified by years,
With force resistless strikes upon the mind,
And wakes the shadows Memory left behind;
Recalls the joyous smile, the sportive jest,
The sob of Pride, half own'd and half supprest:
For Pride e'en here exerts her baleful pow'r,
Felt in our earliest, as our latest hour;
The truant footstep, ling'ring on the way,
Urg'd on by duty, murm'ring to obey;
And the gay wreath, by sportive Fancy wove,
With many a smile, and many a vow of love;
Which blooms in FRIENDSHIP'S eye with equal grace,
Tho' Nature's bloom has faded from the face.
O'er these fond scenes the restless feelings sigh;
Dear valued moments, wing'd too swiftly by!
Nor deem'd we then these day-dreams of delight,
So soon would vanish in the shades of night:
Or that thick gath'ring storms should intervene,
To cloud the prospects of this fairy scene.
Th' horizon's bound was all the world we knew,
And Hope's soft pencil ev'ry image drew.
We scorn'd those strains, with moral precepts fraught,
Which pious Age, or sober Reason taught;
For what seem'd fair bewitch'd our guileless breast,
And a bright semblance was our only test:
Could e'en an Angel's voice one doubt instil,
When all our wisdom was distrust of ill?

Along the elm tree walk, as oft we stray'd,
Where sportive zephyrs thro' the foliage play'd;
As youthful fancy wing'd the circling hour,
We hail'd the charms of love's confiding pow'r,
The tender secret whisper'd in the ear,
And the last charge impress'd with many a tear.
There heart to heart the mystic silence broke,
And guess'd the pain, ere lab'ring sorrow spoke;
Or from the sparkling eye that rapture caught,
Which spurn'd controul, and mock'd the pow'r of thought.
Swift like departing shades these joys have flown;
Sweet joys, to Love and FRIENDSHIP only known!
Yet, as our guardian spirits hover'd nigh,
These hours of bliss were register'd on high.
And do not riper years attest thy sway?
Fade thy rich tints in life's declining day?
Has age no joys to soothe its listless state,
Or gild the dark'ning clouds of adverse fate?
What tho' no Friend, of all once lov'd, remains
To whisper comfort, and to share its pains,
The cherish'd memory of things long past
Shall hold the lamp, and brighten to the last.
Tho' all around seems wrapt in endless gloom,
FRIENDSHIP still gleams upon the op'ning tomb;
And the fond hope, inspir'd by pious love,
Draws back the veil where spirits meet above.

So fade the shadows of departing day,
When with mild lustre glows the setting ray:
So its soft beams, more faintly as they're seen,
Shed o'er the placid soul a light serene,
A light more pleasing to the chasten'd mind,
Than all that dazzling brightness leaves behind.

Say, whence those gentle sympathies arise,
That sever'd hearts in fond remembrance prize?
Whence glow those warm emotions of the soul,
Tho' mountains rise, and distant oceans roll?
Say, why the mind each sacred relic keeps,
And o'er departed pleasures fondly weeps?  
Whence, FRIENDSHIP!  but from thee, whose smile imparts
Life, hope, and rapture to congenial hearts?
Without this charm e'en Fancy's treasures fade,
Fame is a dream, and Honor but a shade:
This charm, that time nor absence can efface,
Which steals from added years improving grace,
Extends to ev'ry state its strong controul,
From CONGO'S shores to ZEMBLA'S frozen pole;
In Sorrow's cell, at Pomp's triumphant side;
The poor man's solace, and the great man's pride.
At CONGO'S name exulting Freedom cries:
"Ye barter'd children, see my hard-earn'd prize!
Securely now enjoy your plantain groves,
Your sable Friendships, and your dusky loves;
Or stretch'd at ease by Gambia's ample stream,
Of brighter worlds and happier regions dream.
Tyrants no more shall mar the God-like plan,
Nor rend those ties, which rivet Man to Man?"

Lo, in ARABIA's desolated soil,
Endearing FRIENDSHIP smoothes the brow of toil,
And boasts around her hospitable boards,
Her bands of brothers, and her friendly hordes.
The smile of fondness, with affection's tear,
Beneath their rude and simple huts appear.
These, as with social tenderness they trace
Thro' tedious marches, and the toilsome chace,
To fainting life a cheering balm expand,
Like tracts of verdure rising midst the sand.

From eastern climes, with bolder feelings fraught,
Go, read the tale with melting pathos wrought;
Where, thro' the long and cheerless night of snow,
The Maid of Greenland mourn'd her hopeless woe!
Where oft, in Fancy's visionary form,
She saw the light bark meet the gath'ring storm;
And thro' the tempest's rage, which rock'd the pole,
She gaz'd, and watch'd, and wept away her soul:
To the wild winds her rising terrors cast,
And mock'd the death, which echo'd thro' the blast.

The harsh Castilian, glorying to be just,
Grasp'd with relentless hand his cruel trust;
Till the strong picture of domestic woe
To this sweet impulse taught his heart to glow.
Then all the ties, which gentler bosoms own,
Burst on his soul, and pierc'd his heart of stone.
Down his rough cheek the tear of pity ran,
And the rude soldier melted into man.

From this blest fount our brightest poets drew
Visions of bliss, and scenes for ever new;
Scenes that alike the gay and pensive charm,
Delight the tender, and the rude disarm;
And still as fresh and fair shall flow the strain,
Till Nature fades, and Chaos comes again.

What tho' these vivid strains, these glowing themes,
Oft prove but fleeting shades, and gilded dreams;
Yet still these dreams beguile the heavy hour,
And to strong contrast owe their sweetest pow'r.

So, when the eye, fatigu'd by dazzling light,
On the green landscape rests its aching sight;
The softer shades of vegetation's hues
To the strain'd nerve a pleasing calm diffuse.

Her fetters burst, Creative Pow'r!  to thee
Aspiring genius bends her grateful knee:
Without thy voice, whose quick'ning sound can shake
Earth's distant verge, and buried talents wake,
Still in the ground the quarried mass would lie,
Whose sculptur'd stores with vivid paintings vie;
Whose breathing forms in ev'ry clime proclaim,
Starting to life, the Maid of Corinth's fame;
She whose obedient hand at FRIENDSHIP'S call,
Trac'd the bold outline on the shadowy wall;
And wak'd those slumb'ring arts to light and day,
That mimic life, and mould the plastic clay.

Long may the portrait's hallow'd touches lend
The valued features of the absent Friend!
What th' the shades of feeling are too fine,
For Art to seize, or Genius to combine;
Yet, dear to FRIENDSHIP, oft with magic fraught,
They strike the soul, and fix the chain of thought:
Thought, whose chaste vigils pious Memory keeps,
Where silent sadness holds her watch, and weeps.
And, as the mourner o'er the semblance hangs,
It steals from widow'd sorrow half its pangs.
Departed joys of Life and FRIENDSHIP rise,
And dark Oblivion renders back her prize.

So objects cherish'd by the Friend we love,
In some sad hour the strong affections move:
So, weeping o'er his bow, ULYSSES' dame
Felt with reviving force her sacred flame;
To dreams of joy or grief her soul resign'd,
As hope and fear alternate rul'd her mind.

Let the pale taper's fading lustre tell,
What kindred souls in cloister'd FRIENDSHIP dwell;
Where moments stole from vigils of the night,
Depicture scenes still imag'd with delight;
Where sighs, oft mingled with the half-form'd pray'r,
The pious list'ner's fond compassion share;
And hopeless tears, by sad remembrance shed,
For joys renounc'd, and hopes for ever fled;
In sweet communion sister sorrows blend,
And fix by sympathy a bosom Friend.

So social feelings centre soul in soul,
As the true needle quivers to the pole.

How sweet the musing of the pensive mind,
By culture polish'd, and by taste refin'd!
Here, in retirement's most secluded bow'rs,
Inventive Fancy wreathes her sweetest flow'rs.
Here Memory reviews her secret stores,
And Hope, exulting, worlds of bliss explores;
And most of all, Affection, hallow'd guest,
Finds the lone hour the haven of her rest.
And as these treasur'd scenes of life are view'd,
Some proof of love is promis'd or renew'd;
Self and its narrow joys are thrown aside;
Some hope supprest, some cherish'd wish denied,
For that lov'd Friend who ev'ry thought employs,
Whose bliss reflected proves her dearest joys.

Hail, tender impulse, at whose sacred shrine
The varying passions all their pow'r resign!
Ah, not alone those tumults of the soul,
That moral truth and pious faith controul;
But all those pleasures of the human heart,
That love of fame and flatt'ring praise impart.
So the sweet Muse, who sang in silver strain
AENEAS' woes, repress'd the flowing vein;
To rising worth resign'd the wreath of fame,
And left the lists to grace a rival's name.
So when HEPHAESTIONS' soul-commanding mien
Drew royal honors from the captive Queen,
No jealous fears, that selfish minds invade,
Cast o'er the Son of JOVE their baleful shade;
But proud himself to bear unsullied test,
To the bold virtues of his rival's breast:
"Tho' not the King," he cried, "his deeds proclaim
Him more than equal, only less in name."

SCIPIO and LAELIUS!  Fame to you consign'd
The fairest wreath admiring FRIENDSHIP twin'd;
When the immortal precepts TULLY taught,
A brighter lustre from your virtues caught;
When he, whose soul th' electric fire possest,
To pierce the dark, and warm the gen'rous breast,
From your pure lips those sacred laws convey'd,
The spotless union of your lives display'd;
And not alone to mutual duties bound,
Your gen'rous love unrivall'd TERENCE found;
Your's, with the warmth to social bosoms dear,
Embrac'd a larger range, a wider sphere.
The props of genius, and the friends of truth,
Ye hail'd the dawning honors of his youth;
Drew from his sprightly lyre a bolder sound,
And round his brows a deathless garland bound.

To hearts like these, with noble feeling fraught,
Who boast the great in deed, the pure in thought,
Folly in vain may shoot her dazzling fly,
And all the pleasing pomp of life display.
These the ambitious and the vain persuade,
Who leave the substance to pursue the shade;
And tho' instinctive nature cries aloud,
Renounce the friend, to court the vulgar crowd!
Those with far higher aim, far nobler view,
The living light of FRIENDSHIP'S path pursue,
And meet the changing scenes of life unmov'd;
Content in loving, and in being lov'd.

But say, ye giddy herd, who tread the maze
Of Fashion's Court, in dissipation's gaze,
Why, midst this specious semblance of delight,
The drooping spirit, and the sleepless night?
Why, midst this fairy scene, the half-drawn sigh,
The fading languor of th' averted eye?
'Tis that the shrine to which these vot'ries bend,
Can gain no heart, nor fix one faithful friend.

Not wise too late, ah!  nobly turn from thence,
To where true taste can lasting joys dispense:
Where the fine intellect, with culture fraught,
Refin'd by feeling, points the polish'd thought;
Where Virtue triumphs in her native sphere,
And social graces social life endear;
And the sweet ties by God and Nature giv'n,
Twine round the heart, and lift the soul to Heav'n.

E'en all the bolder virtues of mankind,
Mingled with this, a stronger impulse find;
Fair Liberty to matchless feats aspires,
And Glory kindles here her brightest fires.

Amidst the annals of heroic fame,
Recording History marks the Ancient's name;
As if the great, the noble, and sublime,
Were the proud attributes of ruder time:
And the fine polish of a taste refin'd,
Weaken'd the firmer virtues of the mind.
As the keen chisel, smoothing in its course,
Discloses beauty with diminish'd force.

What vent'rous deeds the patriot's bosom swell,
Ye sacred band of gallant warriours tell!
Bound by one tie, cemented by one law,
Ye conquer'd states, and kept the world in awe.
TEGYRA still records that fatal day,
When dauntless SPARTA bow'd beneath her sway;
SPARTA, whose stoic courage long defied
The charms of pleasure, and the pomp of pride;
Who spread with daring hand the veil of night
O'er dawning science, and instruction's light;
Repell'd the wheels of time's revolving course,
And struck with freezing touch improvement's source:
And, bending Nature to her harsh controul,
Smother'd the strong emotions of the soul.
Weigh well the pow'r these colder virtues boast,
Then view the THEBAN band o'erwhelm her host.

The SCYTHIAN hordes, by friendly compact bound,
O'er polish'd States an easy conquest found;
True to one cause, the mighty phalanx mov'd,
And the vast weight of martial union prov'd.
The issuing swarms of Norway's frozen home,
Spread devastation o'er degen'rate ROME;
Their desolating banners, wide unfurl'd,
Struck with dismay the Mistress of the World:&mdash;
She fell; by sad experience taught at length,
Wealth is no bulwark, distant sway no strength;
While this was all their hardy conq'rors' boast:
The ties of FRIENDSHIP are themselves a host.
ACHILLES weeping o'er PATROCLUS' bier,
Of Memory claims the tributary tear:
And tender NISUS, dying to defend
Belov'd EURYALUS, his valiant friend:
And self-devoted PYTHIAS, who supprest
All fancy promis'd, and all life possest:
And faithful PYLADES, at the dread shrine
Of Justice, pleading with a force divine,
Where Nature's ties the pious secret broke,
In matchless contest, for the fatal stroke.
Or go where Wit and Pleasure rul'd the hours,
In Academus' philosophic bow'rs;
Where polish'd ATHENS, in her classic seat,
To Love and Learning gave their best retreat.
Such fame in later times Sans Souci shares,
Where Royalty forgot its pomp and cares;
Where classic taste, with courtly ease combin'd,
Improv'd the social graces of the mind;
And love that charms, and mirth that cheers the breast,
Lull'd the imperial ills of life to rest:
While all that wit and elegance inspires,
As genius fann'd her never-dying fires,

Shed round the polish'd guests a ray divine,
By FRIENDSHIP kindled at her hallow'd shrine.
Tho' not in courts nor camps these ties reside,
No Statesman's virtue, and no Courtier's pride,
Yet fam'd beyond the bright historic pag
 Of ancient annals, or our polish'd age,
The THEBAN pair, in Faction's wildest hour,
Its jarring int'rests, its distracting pow'r,
Beheld the swelling waves of discord roll,
Unchang'd in Friendship, and unmov'd in soul;
While the rude storms, which shook the tott'ring state.
But closer bound the int'rests of their fate.

So, when in Rome Ambition rear'd her head,
And base Corruption fatal poison shed,
Firm in the conscious dignity of Man,
His blameless course the great Patrician ran.
Tho' party rage to fiercest discord rose,
And the best friends became the direst foes,
He still retain'd the love his truth inspir'd,
By all respected, and by all admir'd:
And in the silken bands of social life,
Join'd rival pow'rs, and quell'd the civil strife.

Can civic wreaths substantial joys impart?
Can regal honors fill the boundless heart?
Say, midst the flow of flatt'ry's servile vein,
The loud applause, the panegyric strain,
The fawning lips that never disapprove,
And the soft simper of pretended love,
Steals not the tear-drop from the heavy eye?
Heaves not the soul the deep unbidden sigh?
That asks a share in Nature's social plan,
The tender sympathy of Man to Man.
The gen'rous warmth which amity inspires,
The bold reproof courageous love requires;
The gentle voice that wooes the silent grief,
And courts the secret, but to give relief;
The fond surprise, by tenderness prepar'd,
The sorrow lessen'd, and the pleasure shar'd.
How strong this wish, let TRAJAN'S heart attest,
Who pour'd his inmost thoughts in PLINY'S breast.
And great NAVARRE, triumphant Gallia's pride,
Who laid the glitt'ring diadem aside,
To share with SULLY, in retirement's scene,
The social converse, and the hour serene:
Joys which the pomp of courts can seldom claim,
And Royalty possesses but in name.

Ah!  who shall tell thy all-consoling pow'r,
When languid sickness rules the heavy hour?
When on the couch, oppress'd by sore disease,
The restless spirit turns in vain for ease?
What grateful incense to the feeling heart,
To catch the hope endearing smiles impart
To meet the kind caress, the gentle sigh,
And pity, beaming in the tearful eye;
To find, as life's delusive joys expire,
Some tender breast, where sorrow may retire;
Some shelt'ring haven in that gloomy day,
When all but Truth and FRIENDSHIP fade away.
Benignant Spirit!  in that trying scene,
Shed o'er the parting soul thy ray serene;
Blest harbinger of peace, whose syren strain
Can charm despair, and lull the throb of pain;
And best prepare it for those realms above,
Where all is harmony and perfect love.

Glory of Greece!  let latest times admire
What matchless deeds these energies inspire!
How bright, ere fainting Nature sunk to rest,
Glow'd this confiding impulse in thy breast!
This nurs'd the hope, which smooth'd the path of death;
This rais'd the pray'r that trembled on thy breath:
When the bold legacy affection gave,
Stampt its immortal triumph o'er the grave.
Nor less in his, whose gen'rous love prepar'd
To take the double trust his friend had shard;
And only griev'd his first divided part
Display'd but half the FRIENDSHIP of his heart.

Speak, for ye best can tell, whose varying state
Has prov'd the blessings and the frowns of fate:
If more its power, in pleasure or in grief,
To heighten rapture, or to give relief?&mdash;
Not, will you say, when prosp'rous fortune pours
Her sparkling pleasures, and her golden stores;
Not when life's current smoothly glides along,
And laughing Folly trills the choral song.
But when affliction's agonizing tears
Stream o'er the loss of all that life endears;
When slander's breath the fairest virtue taints,
When honor sickens, and when courage faints;
When, one by one, pretended friends retire,
And tow'ring hopes, like fading stars, expire;
And most of all, in that accusing hour,
When keen remorse exerts its cruel pow'r;
That child of guilt, which wakes the blush of shame,
And fans reviving virtue to a flame;
That only trace of EDEN that remains,
Which still our frail and fallen race retains;
And strongly marks, ere saving grace descends,
Where vice begins, and sinking virtue ends.

Ah!  ye, whose hearts o'er human mis'ry sigh,
Arrest this fleeting impulse ere it die;
Come, with an Angel's warning voice, to still
The rising storm, and stem the tide of ill.
Bend, by the sweet enchantment of your sway,
The rebel mind that murmurs to obey;
Calm its wild passions, and its jarring strife,
And win the wav'ring spirit back to life:
Nor let the magic of persuasion pause,
Till God and Pity rise in FRIENDSHIP'S cause.

Sweet Child of Genius, in this favor'd land,
'Twas thine to sink without one saving hand.
Had FRIENDSHIP rais'd for thee her beacon flame,
Still might proud Honor sanctify thy name:
Admiring worlds no more at thy career,
In silent grief, would drop the pitying tear;
But hold to view a bright example, fraught
With ev'ry charm exalted Science taught.

So, when by winds and raging tempests tost,
The white sail beats around the threat'ning coast,
If thro' the clouds the sun illumes the scene,
Sudden the storm is hush'd, the sky's serene;
The sails unfurl'd invite the swelling breeze,
And the light bark glides swiftly o'er the seas;
In triumph cuts the ocean's glassy bed,
And anchors safe from danger and from dread.

Ah!  let not lawless passion's transient pow'r
Blast the rich fruits of life's unspotted hour;
Nor conscious worth, with pride indignant rend
This tender tie, and sever Friend from Friend.
If but one virtue mark the sad career,
One ray of hope the gloomy prospect cheer;
One smother'd spark beneath this load of woe,
That waits for Mercy's hallow'd breath to glow;
Tho' forfeit life expire beneath the steel,
Immortal FRIENDSHIP still displays her zeal;
And tho' her calmer reason disapprove,
Laments in silence with unshaken love.
Hope of the wretched, spirit of the brave!
'Tis thine to comfort when forbid to save;
'Tis thine in gentle strains to whisper peace,
Bid present doubts in future prospects cease;
'Tis thine to shew the paths a Saviour trod,
And lead the mourner to the throne of God:
Mount the dread scaffold, soothe his parting breath,
And twine thy garland round the brow of death.

Spirit of wounded love!  to thee belongs
JAFFIER'S atoning deed for FRIENDSHIP'S wrongs,
For PIERRE denounc'd, when most he hop'd for aid,
For Honor sacrific'd, and Love betray'd;
For wrongs not e'en affection can erase,
Tho' beauty plead in BELVIDERA'S face;
And tho' persuasion on her gentle tongue,
Charm like the strains enchanting Sirens sung;
For wrongs so deep, that tho' repentant shame
Strikes the entreated blow to clear her fame,
Crowns the last hope on which affection hangs,
And spares dishonor's aggravated pangs:
Not less than life the fatal bond could pay:
Not less than blood could wash the guilt away.

Ah!  never hope by lawless deeds to bind
The strong affections of a gen'rous mind.
All, all, but innocence the charm destroys,
And bursts the spell that bound her dearest joys;
O'er ev'ry scene a deadly influence sheds,
And marks the path where desolation treads.
Else why the alter'd look, the clouded brow,
And the deep sigh of honor's broken vow?
Else why the doubt by riper years confest,
Doubt, the lone grave where buried comforts rest?
Where blighted hopes and ruin'd peace proclaim
Dishonor's triumph under FRIENDSHIP'S name.
There she, who bloom'd in conscious virtue proud,
The modest beauty of the rustic crowd;
Whose virgin charms, in time's revolving space,
Had only yielded to the matron's grace;
Had no false tale her simple heart assail'd,
No promis'd dream of endless love prevail'd,
That in the softer feelings of her breast,
Lull'd duty's sterner sentiments to rest.
Lur'd from a peaceful home, a mother's arms,
She mourns in solitude her fatal charms;
And sunk in poverty's neglected shade,
No voice to succour, and no hand to aid;
To Heav'n she turns her meek imploring eyes,
Neglected suffers, and unnotic'd dies.

The gallant youth, whose bosom pants to claim
The brightest laurels in the wreath of fame;
Warm, open, unsuspecting, artless, gay,
Pure as the gentle breeze of vernal day;
Too early launch'd on life's tempestuous stream,
Finds all his promis'd hopes a fleeting dream.
Beneath the smile that won his easy heart,
Lurk'd cruel malice, and insidious art.
Dup'd where he trusted, where he lov'd, betray'd,
Too sad to hope, too proud to ask for aid;
With shame reviews the fatal paths he trod,
And meets, uncall'd, the presence of his God.
Not here, alas!  the dreadful evils cease:
Burst are those links that bound domestic peace.
So close the union of the social breast,
Touch but one string, it vibrates thro' the rest;
To cruel discord turns the heav'nly strain,
Jars the fine nerve, and wakes distracting pain;
Each pleasing scene parental fondness trac'd,
By virtue strengthen'd, and by beauty grac'd;
The pride of riper years, the prop of age,
The purest type of life's unsullied page,
Fade with the loss of Nature's dearest ties,
While hope expires with all that hope can prize.

What mournful strains the Lord's anointed sung,
When perjur'd ABSALOM his bosom wrung;
High o'er proud Carmel's consecrated brow,
Peal'd the sad notes of duty's broken vow.
Through Heav'n's wide vaults the bitter accents run:
"O had I died for thee, my Son, my Son!"
But when the Prophet struck his deep-ton'd lyre,
To mourn departed FRIENDSHIP'S sacred fire,
He wak'd a tend'rer and a softer strain,
For "ISRAEL'S beauty," number'd with the slain.
"I weep, my brother JONATHAN, for thee:
Passing the love of women was thy love to me."
'Mid all the ills that human life displays,
How few that want inflicts, or wealth allays!
How fewer still whose crying wrongs demand
Avenging Justice from th' Almighty's hand!

Justice, that slow and never sure redress,
That galling mock'ry of extreme distress,
Which makes the tender breast more deeply feel,
And only probes the wound it means to heal.
Sorrows more keen a ready entrance find,
To wring the heart, and pierce the feeling mind:
The bitter tear, by wounded FRIENDSHIP shed,
That nightly steeps the waking mourner's bed;
The cold neglect, the sullen proud disdain;
Repentant anguish, and remorseless pain:
The sacred name of Honor but a shade;
Confiding faith and trusting love betray'd.
But who can picture all the secret grief,
And silent sorrow, that defies relief?
When FRIENDSHIP weeps, how many fibres bleed,
While from the soul it cherish'd hopes recede!
Those lov'd delights on which affection leans,
Familiar habits, and long-valued scenes;
These, as fate severs, and as chance destroys,
Rend from the heart its solace and its joys;
While on remembrance past endearments press,
And by strong contrast aggravate distress.

Ah, ye, who bow to reason's cold controul,
Pity the soft refinement of the soul;
Pity its nameless pangs, its restless fears,
Those gentle sympathies that love reveres;
Spare the keen jest, till some nice clue you find,
To trace the fine machin'ry of the mind;
Think not its tears a doubt of love convey;
Spirits, unknown to you, its feelings sway;
Spirits that rule each fibre of the frame,
That joy delights to own, and grief can claim.
Ah!  sooner strive to grasp the rainbow's hues,
Or catch the fleeting shades that fancy views;
Or count the ceaseless movements of the brain,
Or the wild phrenzies of the Poet's strain:
This still shall mock the vain attempts of art,
This masterpiece of God, a feeling heart.

Ere yet my timid Muse prepare to sing
What matchless deeds from kindred FRIENDSHIPS spring;
Ere yet she pause her trembling wing to close,
And snatch from pleasing toils a short repose;
Some valued Friends, to fond remembrance dear,
Some social int'rests, claim the tender tear;
And by a charm, Affection only gives,
Arrest the images where Fancy lives.

O thou, whose memory tunes this artless lay,
My more than Mother!  in life's early day,
How lov'd, sweet childhood's blissful hours might know:
How mourn'd, succeeding grief could only show.
Yet since thy angel Spirit wing'd its flight
To the pure regions of celestial light,
Oft when by life's increasing cares opprest,
I hail'd the soothing thought of virtue blest
Happy that she who wip'd my infant tears,
Was spar'd the anguish of my riper years;
Dear Saint!  to thee my joys were only known,
For human woes ne'er reach th' eternal throne.

And thou, sweet partner of my happiest hours,
To whom my soul its choicest tribute pours;
From whose rich mind enraptur'd fancy caught
The light of intellect, the charm of thought;
All that fair truth and brilliant wit impart,
And most of all, the treasures of thy heart.
Ah!  not alone in youth's enchanting prime,
FRIENDSHIP like our's displays its pow'r sublime:
Our's the congenial sympathies of mind,
That soul to soul in tender union bind.
Our's the dear bliss of sweet reflection's praise,
The self-approving thought of former days;
Confiding Faith, by no sad doubts obscur'd;
Well-tried esteem, by years of pain secur'd;
And the best gift indulgent Mercy gave:
The hope of endless love beyond the Grave.

