On a calm, and clear river brink,
Clarissa sat chearfully down,
Delighted with freedom to think,
And pleas'd to be absent from town.
The birds, from the woods all around,
With warbling delighted her ear;
And the waters in murmurs fell down
From a nat'ral cascade that was near.

How pleasantly does our time pass,
(She to her companion did say),
Since first we arriv'd in this place,
Where now we will constantly stay!
While every thing round us looks gay,
In innocent, harmless delight,
We'll chearfully spend every day,
And books will divert us at night.

We'll strive to imbellish our minds,
Our noblest part we will store,
With knowledge of various kinds,
Which lasts when frail beauty's no more.
Amusements that innocent are,
All our vacant hours shall employ;
While free from each anxious, vain care,
Contentment will heighten our joy.

A happiness thus we possess,
Which belles in the town never find,
Their pleasure consists in their dress;
But ours, in improvement of mind.
Let them have their visiting days;
More real delight we can feel,
In reading Shakspear's old plays,
Than spending our time at quadrille.

And see the dear source of my joy;
Sure heaven our union approves:
With him comes my smiling young boy,
Who shares in our innocent loves.
And now, my Eliza, you'll own,
If you'd the truth frankly declare,
No fluttering beau of the town
Can with my Alexis compare.

Youth, beauty, and each manly grace,
I in my dear partner do find,
But what are the charms of his face,
To the nobler charms of his mind!
There goodness and friendship doth shine,
And virtue, quite free from all art;
With these, his good sense too did join
To captivate my yielding heart.

And with them young Strephon appears,
Whose heart my Eliza alarms,
O free the dear youth from his fears,
And yield him thy numberless charms.
Such virtue the swain doth possess,
That surely thy heart must approve
His merit, and freely confess,
He only deserves all thy love.

Thus happy Clarissa doth live,
And here she for ever may find
(The blessing which Fortune can't give)
A real contentment of mind.
She with her lov'd spouse doth possess
The pleasures retirement doth give;
And all that do know them, confess,
No couple more happy can live.
