Happy the man, devoid of many a wo,
Who, blessed with gentler stars, supinely lolls
Within the covering of a splendid coach;
Or whom two brawny highlanders (who boast
Their high descent, perchance, from ancient chief,
For wond'rous deed and great achievement
In the rude carol of the bards of old)
Bear in the snug sedan; him nor the splash
Of heedless schoolboy, nor the dirty whip
Of the proud horseman, can annoy.  But I,
Fated to toil among the drudging croud,
The creeping actors of the lower scene,
Who live upon the wonder of a world,
Like maggots in a cheese, &mdash; merely to feed on't,
Amidst the batt'ring rain, unwholesome mist,
Cold driving sleet, and Boreas' piercing blast,
Unheeded trudge along the well-known length
Of stinking alleys; happy, if perchance
My hat uncock'd, or close surtout, defends
From the rough shower; or if my faithful shoes,
New sol'd, and leakless, can resist the rush
Of meeting torrents; or if Fortune wards
From my devoted head the full discharge
Of worser from above; not such a shower
As when t' enamour'd Jupiter, in form
Of that all-conqu'ring metal, whose high power
Has wrought such horrors since upon the world,
To Danae descended; but a shower
Nauseous and loathsome, and of which the muse
(If like the ladies of our nicer days,
As such I hold your modern muse to be)
At the recital could not chuse but faint,
If powerful heartshorn, or the winged salt,
Flew not a speedy succour to her aid.
This ill escap'd, now in the open street,
I walk secure; when, lo!  a sudden gust
Of rising wind, from the wide-yawning mouth
Of some unnotic'd close, has rushen forth,
My hat surpris'd, it wheels aloft in air,
Which in some puddle's stinking stream is dash'd;
Good luck insooth if even so 'tis found.

Anon, to shun each evil, when my hand
Pins fast my dripping bonnet to mine ear,
Careless of aught behind; a chairman's haste
(Who profits by th' inclemency of heaven)
Drives on my back the mischief of his poles.
Where shall I fly?  again the lanes I walk,
Secure from greater evils, and content
If all at other other risk I save my bones.

Or if the cloudy visage of the morn
Pours forth her fleecy snow upon the world,
Behold a line of ready schoolboys stand,
And if I doff not my obedient hat,
From every side the volley pours around,
(Due chastisement I ween of pride unmeet).
In vain resistance; when a gnatling stings
Bootless the lion roars:  in flight alone
My safety lies; my ready heels obey,
While loud huzzas pursue me as I fly.

See, in the front of yon tobaconist's
A knot of busy politicians stand;
In a close circle are their noddles set:
Whilst all the common-place of Rumour's lie,
North Britons, Patriots, Pensions, Pillories,
At every greedy ear are suck'd, behold!
A loosen'd fragment of collected snow,
Thaw'd by the tepid vapour, from the eves
Rolling descends; amid the ferry'd group
Dealing destruction vast; see where a hat
Is buried 'neath its ruins, there a wig
Hangs like the branches of some ancient oak
In silver majesty:  another wretch
Yields to the weighty blow, and stagg'ring falls,
Whilst Wilkes half-utter'd quivers on his lips.

And when again the sable-suited Night
Envelops in her shroud the dusky town,
Close by the side of some smoke-darken'd lamp,
(Like a red meteor girt with drizzly air),
A ballad-singer stands, and to the croud,
Most apt to catch the frolic of his song,
The old-new jest, and bawdry humour, chants,
A little further, in a hollow tone,
A doleful voice the doleful tale recites
Of prodigy, or apparition dire,
"How that at such a time, and such a place,
By the old serpent lur'd, a desperate wretch,
For worldly pleasure, to the devil sold
His soul immortal, and at seven years end,
In some huge bear-like shape, the fiend he came,
And from the midst of friends, that pray'd in vain,
In a blue flame the wretched victim snatch'd."
This history, perchance, some boys have got,
And by the fluttering light of winter's fire,
The senior to his list'ning comrades reads;
And as the horror of the drama swells,
The frighted imps in closer circle meet,
With many a look aslant the darkness cast,
While in some nook obscure their fancy paints
Tall apparitions, and blood-dropping heads,
Terrific forms that haunt 'em to their beds,
And mar their broken sleep with horrid dreams.
Thus ever baneful curiosity,
The strongest passion of the weakest minds,
Is most ingenious to torment itself,
And feeds upon the poison of its quiet.

See o'er his half-door where the shop-boy hangs,
With listless stare agape; while by the side
Of yon small light his blotted day-book lies.

A little on in my accustom'd walk,
The busy coppersmith's incessant clink
Invades my ear, with sounds like those which heard
The musing Richard at the dead of night
In the dread eve of Bosworth's bloody field,
When for the purple horrors of the morn
"The armourers accomplished the chief."

Hark!  hark!  a louder peal, the son'rous cry
Of a poor veteran labouring forth his lungs
In act vociferous, and to the delicate ear
Form'd for the harmony of dulcet sounds,
Astonishment and dizzy horror sends,
While "Pies, &mdash; Hot mutton pies," his song proclaims:
Which, if tradition lies not, (who has ly'd
From Homer's time down to these days of ours),
From horses brawny buttocks have been slic'd.

Ah me!  how little past deserts avail!
The noble horse, who in the gallant chace,
With all the thunder of his swiftness, bore
His rider cross the plain; or at the sound
Of the shrill trumpet, with impatient neigh,
Shook his high mane, and paw'd the trembling ground;
By his unpitying master now cast off,
To the vile drudgery of a carman's load,
With thousand ills oppress'd, he sinks beneath
The load of lashes, and of hunger fell:
And when no profit but his skin remains,
To some ignoble corner is led forth,
Where in his throat the murderer strikes his knife,
And his flea'd body to the hounds commits;
The hounds, once partners of his fav'rite toils.

Thus far, with indignation borne, we've stray'd;
But soon, by the Stentorian cry arous'd,
Return we, Muse, to where the rising knell
Sounds forth his little merchandise again.
Mark how the boy of waggish humour slips
His back behind, and with the mangled corpse
Of a poor cat, whose life eight times made mock
At fate inexorable; fallen now
Beneath the wanton cruelty of sport;
Full in his face imprints the mark obscene:
While he his curses impotently roars,
Another his sly hand insinuates
Into the guardless basket, and conveys,
With triumph loud, the smoaking prize away.

O  Mischief!  busiest of the busy fiends!
How early and how late thy reign thou holdst
Within the breast of reasonable man!
The urchin to a fly's contorted tail
Fastens a pin, and smiles; the hoary statesman
Sees nations ruin'd by his wiles accurst,
In conscious villany applauds himself.

By thee, perhaps, some surly critic mov'd
With nose upturn'd these humble lines surveys,
And in their dull stupidity exults.
But tell him, Mischief, I regard him not
If to the bottom of a reeking pye
This verse shall travel, it is done its work,
What many a Noble Lord's have done before;
And where his own most celebrated sneers
Would be well honour'd should they find a place,
Sav'd from the dirtier work of physic'd wights.
