O HAPPINESS, thou pow'r divinely fair!
If on this earth thou ever deign'st to dwell,
If courts or camps thy gen'rous bounty share,
Or if thou lov'st the peasant's lowly cell:
O send some friendly aid!
Thy suppliant's steps to guide
To the bless'd regions where thou dost dispense,
Those heav'nly joys that never pall upon the sense.

Supine I lay beneath a sylvan shade,
Which ne'er is pierc'd by Phoebus' pointed ray,
Upon a couch with lively verdure spread,
Where purling rills in sweet meanders play;
When diff'rent objects rise,
New scenes salute my eyes,
Now hope and joy within my bosom glow,
And now life's purple stream forgets its usual flow.

Upon the border of a flow'ry plain,
Near to a craggy steep I seem'd to stand;
When thus fair VIRTUE, with a splendid train
Of modest smiling nymphs on either hand:
"The goddess heard thy pray'r,
To me she left the care
Straight to conduct thee to the pleasant bow'r,
Where she upon her sons doth sweets celestial pour.

"The only entrance to the sacred dome,
Lies through my palace, and that ivory gate.
But most upon the left do wildly roam,
To mis'ry doom'd by Folly and by Fate:
While those who boldly dare,
Avoid the fatal snare,
And to my temple bravely make their way,
Ne'er feel the piercing pangs of Terror and Dismay.

"Down in the vale th' inchantress crafty dwells,
False Pleasure call'd, where with her syren song
The list'ning croud with flatt'ring hopes she swells,
Through mazes dark conducts the thoughtless throng,
Whose hearts Remorse and Care
Like greedy vultures near,
While stern Despair with kindred fiends affright,
And last sink down to regions of eternal night."

She said:  Her radiant eyes emit a fire
Which with surprise my beating bosom thrill'd;
Her pleasing accents did new strength inspire,
And all my soul with heav'nly vigour fill'd:
Then in majestic state,
Toward the palace-gate,
The goddess fair, with joy, sweet Peace, and Love,
And many a sister-nymph, in slow procession move.

As the tall bark does skim the azure main,
And o'er its surface smoothly glides along;
So does the heav'nly form sweep o'er the plain,
With gentle blooming nymphs a brilliant throng:
The gate at her command,
Does quickly open stand,
And when it had receiv'd the shining train,
On golden hinges mov'd spontaneous, clos'd again.

The shining dome, with wonder strikes my view:
In order just Corinthian columns rise,
All polish'd marble!  some aethereal blue,
Some brightest white do mingle with the skies,
The suppliant crouds adore
The goddess, heav'nly pow'r!
Who pass'd her temple to the sacred place
Where HAPPINESS resides, with ev'ry tender grace.

Ecstatic joys I never felt before,
Pour on my soul, and swell my ravish'd heart;
Like lightning, odours glide thro' every pore,
And new emotions rise in ev'ry part:
Her sweet and noble mien
Declare the heav'nly queen,
Who sat inthron'd above the rest in state,
While Temperance, Health, and many a fair around her wait.

Her comely cheeks surpass the blooming rose,
Her ruby lips the fair vermilion bright;
All snowy white her heaving bosom shows,
Her eyes like phosphor dart a beamy light.
When to the radiant throne
Which bright as Phoebus shone,
With gentle steps I now approached near,
These heav'nly accents vibrate on my listening ear.

"Aspiring son, this truth momentous know,
That bliss refin'd no riches can obtain;
It, nor high birth, nor beauty, can bestow,
Nor all the gems that deck the liquid main:
Bring all the ore that shines
In India's golden mines,
Collect what wealth in earth or ocean lies,
Not all their ample stores could gain the glorious prize.

"The human race do early wing their way,
On Fancy's pinions borne with rapid flight,
Toward my temple:  but do quickly stray,
Soon as they view the base inchanting sight,
The gay, the painted bow'r,
Where Pleasure false doth pour,
Out from her magic cup, draughts that impair
Their highest pow'rs, and lead them to the fatal snare.

"But if to VIRTUE fair, each rising morn,
And ev'ry night, thou honours duly pay;
If thou the charmer's voice dost bravely scorn,
Nor tread'st the dangerous and destructive way;
Enjoyments more refin'd
Shall fill thy raptur'd mind;
Much nobler blessings swell thy glowing heart,
Than all the tasteless joys False Pleasure can impart."

Far from the allurements of the rosy bow'r,
Far from the dangers of the beaten way,
With all their blandishments, CELESTIAL POW'R!
Grant me secure to dwell, I meant to say:
But ere my lips could part
To speak the thoughts my heart
Inspir'd; the dome, the nymphs, and goddess fair,
All fading on my view, dissolv'd in liquid air.
