When sable Night resumes her silent reign,
From ev'ry care, save that of sadness, free,
I steal an hour from Folly's trifling train,
To meet the Muse beneath this lonely tree.

Cynthia, emerging from behind a cloud,
Swift rolls her silver-axel'd car along;
And Philomela, from the neigh'bring wood,
Melodious warbles out her plaintive song.

Calm is the night, and peaceful is the glade,
Save where the rill comes murm'ring from the heath,
Soft is the breeze that whispers through this shade,
And joins with me to sigh Philander's death.

And is Philander dead!  could Heaven behold,
And yield him blooming to the arms of Death?
Perhaps 'twas false!  some idle rumour told,
And whisper'd round, by Fame's malicious breath.

Ah!  then, what meant the mother's mournful groan?
What meant her eye to stream without controul?
Why does she languish with incessant moan,
If Death had spar'd the darling of her soul?

Why steals yon tear from sad Cleora's eye?
Why speaks her tongue the accents of despair?
Why heaves her bosom with the heart-felt sigh?
Too well, alas!  these signs the truth declare.

Then he was fair; for Nature was his friend:
A smile of softness languish'd in his eye;
On both his cheeks the glow of youth had reign'd,
Like western blushes of an ev'ning sky.

His were the Arts; for these he lov'd, and try'd;
But well he knew his knowledge to suppress:
Well was he skill'd the pencil's stroke to guide,
And trace fair Nature in her loveliest dress.

The youth was gen'rous; for his soul was large;
He little knew the caution to refuse;
He little knew the avaricious charge,
The abject art that narrow souls can use.

O thou, the darling of a mother's life,
But now, alas!  the source of all her woes,
Whose early death has pierc'd her soul with grief,
And op'd a wound which med'cine ne'er can close;

Tell us, O tell, (for now alas!  you can),
What now you are, and we must shortly be;
What scenes, what wonder, are reserv'd for man;
What you behold, and we are blind to see.

But no; &mdash; let Peace, fair Peace, be still thy lot,
Peace be thy guide on t' other side the grave!
Whilst we (tho' all we can avails thee not)
Shall mourn the youth we lov'd, but could not save.

Say, gentle Shade, was no kind friend at hand,
No weeping maid, to close a stranger's eye?
No friend to aid him in a foreign land,
And see his breath departing, with a sigh?

No tender parent dropt a parent's tear,
Or smooth'd the languor of the bed of Death;
No weeping sister languish'd o'er his bier,
Grasp'd his cold hand, or caught his trembling breath.

Perhaps false hopes indulg'd a mother's care,
Perhaps she fancied, what she wish'd, to view,
Once more to see thee breathe thy native air,
To clasp thee close, and all her joy renew.

But no!  'tis past!  no native country he,
Nor parents, friends shall see, nor joys to come!
Ah no!  'tis past!  by cruel Fate's decree
Too soon, too soon, he moulders in a tomb.

The tomb!  cold, peaceful scene, that ends our woes,
Where ev'ry sigh, where ev'ry pang is o'er!
There, quiet alike, the friend and foe repose,
There Envy's mute, and Anguish weeps no more.

O ye whose vagrant steps stray here by chance,
If e'er Benevolence has warm'd your breast,
If e'er fair Pity's mildest, softest glance;&mdash;
Weep o'er the grave that holds a stranger's dust.

(For know, Philander reach'd his flowery prime,
And well he grew, till (Heaven would have it so),
The tomb receiv'd him from your cruel clime,
The tomb where you, and I, and all must go.)

So may yourselves in peace eternal rest,
Nor live to weep your children in the tomb;
So may your sons with happier fates be blest,
And end at last, their aged days at home.

The roseate Morn, in crimson-spotted vest,
With earliest tears Philander's grave shall dew;
And milder Eve, in safron mantle drest,
O'er this sad spot the tribute shall renew.

Here shall some gentle youth, whose lonely step
Still haunts the silence of the twilight shade,
Steal from the croud, and o'er this grave shall weep,
Whilst this reflection, sadly true, is made:

"By Folly flatter'd, and by Hope betray'd,
We build on dreams, and laugh among the croud,
Till Death comes on, in midnight-pomp array'd,
Destroys our schemes, and wraps us in a shroud.

"From Death's cold hand, no bribe, no power can shield;
His voice the weak, his power the strong obeys;
E'en blooming Youth itself to him must yield;
Who doubts this truth, look, here Philander lies.

INSCRIPTION ON THE TOMB-STONE.
To the memory of &mdash;&mdash; of Edinburgh,
Who was born 2d of March 1746.
May
This plain stone
Claim pity to a mother,
From whom your scorching climes
Tore her best hopes,
Her young, her ever-loving only son;
In whose warm soul dwelt Pity, Love, and Truth,
And mild Humanity,
The spur to gen'rous deeds.
Oh!  for a mother's sake, let no rude hands
E'er wrong a stranger's humble, peaceful, grave;
So may your own dear hopes in foreign lands,
Ne'er need the boon a hopeless parent craves.
