By Branno's streams two lovely shepherds lay,
One chearful morn of sweetly-blooming May;
And while they sung beneath the rustling shade,
Where through the clasping elms the breezes play'd,
The Muse, soft list'ning, trode the neigh'bring dale,
And heard, well pleas'd, the sadly-pleasing tale.

DAMON.
See!  how the lambkins frisk on yonder hills,
Where o'er the cliffs descend the trickling rills.
Look eastward &mdash; how the rivers join their streams,
And tremble, glitt'ring, in the sunny beams!
How soft the music of the feather'd throng!
How sweet the linnet trills her matin song!
The cooing turtle, from yon hanging grove,
In languid dittay seeks her absent love.
Hark how the mavis and the blackbird sing!
The sprightly cuckow welcomes in the spring.
Look how the daisies deck th' enamell'd ground!
The whit'ning hawthorn flings its sweets around!
The balmy woodbine, how it twists these trees,
That gently murmur to the western breeze!
The morn ascends, in richest liv'ry clad:
All nature smiles! &mdash; and why is Mopsus sad!

MOPSUS.
Could Nature's beauties make me cease to grieve,
A morn like this might half my pains relieve.
Did Damon know the crosses I endure,
Alas!  woeful I, to think, when, like to thee,
Each blooming scene could pleasance give to me!
These eyes, estranged to tears, could then survey
The gayly-rising morn, themselves as gay!
How thriv'd my kids!  how thriv'd my tender lambs!
What milky stores flow'd from their fertile dams!
Heedless of care, myself could see them feed,
While echo answer'd to my slender reed.
No wight more winsome pac'd the dewy  green,
No blyther shepherd on the hills was seen!&mdash;
But what a change one circling year can show,
Th' immortal gods above can only know.&mdash;
Ah!  luckless, now in pinching want I pine,
And all my future days to woe resign:
No gleam of hope my clouded life to chear!
And all my comfort now the piteous tear!&mdash;
Let me the shepherds flee, and all alone
To shaggy rocks and caverns make my moan.
And ye, my flocks, my once thrice happy care,
Ah me!  how ragged now ye grow, and bare!
Your keeper now no more the crook shall wield;
His fields no more shall plenteous harvest yield.&mdash;
DAPHNIS is dead, for whom I wish'd to live!
DAPHNIS is dead! &mdash; and why should I survive?

Ah, what avails it, that the woods resound
With chanting birds, and all things laugh around?
Can chanting birds from poverty defend?
Or Nature's smiles restore the Noble friend?
Ah no! &mdash; Let Nature's course inverted be;
Let spring and summer wear no charms for me:
Let day and night his hapless death deplore;
DAPHNIS our boast, our honour, now no more!

To think how good he was! &mdash; Ah ruthless Night!
More ruthless Fate! &mdash; that snatch'd him from our sight.&mdash;
Death hurried him away &mdash; Oh most unkind!
To take the good, and leave the bad behind.
DAPHNIS, the pride of Caledonia's swains,
The darling lord of all the neigh'bring plains,
Is gone! &mdash; Now, shepherds, may ye mourn indeed!
Ye sung at ease; &mdash; he gave you flocks to feed.
Now, flocks, adieu! &mdash; Adieu, the sylvan throng!
He's dead who did the shepherd's wants supply.&mdash;
Alas, ye gods!  ah, why did DAPHNIS die!

Where shall we know such wealth, such greatness find,
With goodness, truth, and charity combin'd!
How many thousands now with me bemoan
His timeless fate, in which they see their own!
What gen'rous hand shall now relieve the poor,
Or peace and plenty to the swain ensure?
This DAPHNIS did. &mdash; With DAPHNIS whom compare?
The good of all was DAPHNIS' greatest care.
Hear it, ye great, &mdash; He was religious too,
And to fair Virtue's cause stood ever true.
Now, high and low, your mournful loss deplore:
Religion, Virtue, &mdash; Charity, no more!&mdash;

 DAMON.
The gods but took their own. &mdash; 'Tis vain to mourn
The friend departed, never to return.
What pity, Mopsus, that you thus complain!
You wrong Heaven's justice, and yourself, in vain.
DAPHNIS now rests in yon ethereal sky,
Where, crown'd with angel's bliss, he sits on high&mdash;
And why despair? &mdash; Th' illustrious offspring lives,
And all the father in the son revives.&mdash;
Then why not hope to see my country bless'd,
And ev'ry swain of happiness possess'd;
While DAPHNIS, still propitious, from above
Smiles down upon us with an angel's love?
Oft on his altar then the kid shall bleed,
Or fattest lambkin from my fleecy breed.
While stars shall twinkle, and the circling sun
From east to west his daily race shall run;
While springs return, and cattle grase the plain,
Thy honour'd name, great DAPHNIS!  shall remain.

MOPSUS.
But let us shun yon sudden drizzling show'r
That hither tends.  The clouds begin to low'r.&mdash;
Farewell, ye streams, whom DAPHNIS taught to flow!
Farewell, ye groves, whom DAPHNIS taught to grow!
Farewell, ye rocks, whom DAPHNIS taught to smile!
Farewell, ye flow'ry vales, and native soil!&mdash;
What horrid woes my loaded life pursue!&mdash;
DAPHNIS, farewell, &mdash; and happiness adieu!
