In climes beneath remoter skies,
Beyond the vast Atlantic Main,
Where Commerce bids new realms arise,
And Desarts smile with golden grain,

(Brought from a happy, distant Isle
Which Neptune's circling arms inclose,
On which still Heav'n and Nature smile)
A purple-flower'd Arbutus rose.

Yet oft' the neigh'bring savage tread
The tender plant was known to wound;
And winds and scorching heats invade,
And bend it drooping to the ground.

'Till lo!  with pow'rful skill endu'd,
From its own native climate fair,
A Husbandman its strength renew'd,
And foster'd with a parent's care.

He from surrounding lakes and rills
Brought healthful streams which swelling roll'd,
Drawn by his pow'r o'er meads and hills,
To crisped sands and beds of gold.

Then a green fence, a rural mound,
He rais'd, near which an Oak there grew,
Sublime; &mdash; and to the cultur'd ground,
The solitary plant withdrew.

Now shelter'd from inclement skies,
Alike as from the sultry ray,
The vig'rous tree began to rise,
And glow'd and blossom'd on the day.

But as she rose she pining view'd
The Oak's majestic spreading height,
As nutur'd by the neighb'ring flood,
And glorying in superior might.

Should now the stream withdraw its aid,
My plant above his top shall rise,
My roots shoot down to Lethe's shade,
My tow'ring branches prop the skies.

She said; the stream by other hands,
Was taught another course to know;
But wond'ring, from the cultur'd lands,
Back to its source it sought to flow.

To either tree at once it fail'd,
Diverted from its native bed;
The Oak by parching drought assail'd,
Droop'd the green honours of his head.

The youthful plant no longer finds
The healthful soil, the shelt'ring pow'r,
But parching suns and cutting winds,
At once destroy the plant and flow'r.

The green fence from the moisture lost,
Now finds a quick and last decay,
Invaded by a savage host,
The sad Arbutus pines away.

The Oak, tho' drooping in his prime,
Again his wonted strength resumes,
Doom'd to survive to future time,
Again in latter youth he blooms.

Yet still he mourns his favour'd tree,
And weeps the ill effects of pride,
That strength could part from liberty,
And honour from fair truth divide.

Hear and attend! &mdash; be wise in time
Ye Subjects of a blest domain:
The Arbutus of the western clime
Is YOURS, the Oak denotes OUR reign.

Should Commerce once her aid deny,
In vain would BOTH the ill recall;
Britain must droop, and you must die,
While foes shall triumph in y our fall.
