The Leasowe's plaintive Bard long since has told
The pomp which leads the wealthy to the tomb,
And when in death some rural Alcon's cold,
To sleep unnoted is his certain doom;

Save when the Muse with votive song attends;
Save when she sweetly pours the fun'ral ray,
To weeping neighbours, and to drooping friends,
His mildly shining virtues to display.

More venal now are found the sons of Verse!
To lowly worth will no one strike the lyre?
Or tell the pangs the needy widow pierce,
When falls the object of her fond desire?

Trust me, the rich, the pow'rful, and the brave,
Have not for theirs alone the wreath of fame;
It worth approves, e'en from the turfy grave
His share with justice may the peasant claim.

Slow through the church-way path, on rustic bier,
The corpse was carried to the grass-grown sod,
O'er which my Muse will proudly drop a tear:
"An honest Man's the noblest work of God."

Such wert thou, Damon, be that honour thine;
Full long thou wert the victim of disease,
In pain and sickness didst thou patient pine,
Unfelt the transport of a moment's ease.

Ye sons of plenty, ye but little know
(Tho' soft compassion in your breasts resides)
The veriest bitter in the cup of woe,
Which pallid poverty perforce imbibes.

Does sickness warn &mdash; it is your hour to die?
Your wedded mate, your babes afford relief&mdash;
'Tis fond affection moistens every eye,
'Tis fond affection softens all your grief.&mdash;

Their present sorrow time shall lenient heal,
While wealth a decent ease shall not withhold.
Their tranquil hearts a steady calm shall feel,
Nor know of want, but when by pity told.

Go to the straw-thatch'd cot and ope the door,
There on th' expiring object fix thine eyes!
Loud shrieks his Spouse, his offspring loud deplore,
While he in agony but scarcely sighs.

To lose the Husband and the Sire is pain,
'Tis pain to leave the Children and the Wife;
But who this separation can sustain,
When thus the living lose the means of life?

Where shall the helpless mourner comfort find?
What shall arrest her long-continued tear?&mdash;
Thy lord could boast an honest soul and mind,
A Christian heart both humble and sincere.

When sickness wasted, when no strength remain'd,
The needful requisites of food to earn,
The mystery of letters he explain'd,
And lisping infants came of him to learn.

Ye smiling innocents, who thus could keep
The Sabbath's rest from vice and folly freed,
May you the harvest of your labour reap,
And all the precepts of the gospel read!

As learning frowns nor on your lowly birth,
Ye scholars young, in artless lines relate,
Upon that stone which props the briar'd earth,
The sad memorial of your teacher's fate.

The record there your grateful hands shall trace,
(As knowledge now may be the pauper's meed),
Pleas'd, your descendants oft with modest grace,
With honest pity thus shall mournful read,

THE EPITAPH.
A Servant honest, and a Master just,
A Parent tender, and a Husband kind,
Here mould'ring mingles with his native dust,
His trembling soul to Heaven's behest consign'd.

To Him, whose ravens could the Prophet feed,
With fervent zeal he breath'd his latest pray'r;
For those he left in poverty and need,
He ask'd his pity, and implor'd his care.

May he propitious, hear that fond request,
Without whose will not e'en the sparrow's fall;
And in this grave these meaner ashes rest,
'Till the last sentence be pronounc'd on all!
