High in a garret's lofty precincts dwelt
A wretch, by Phoebus and the nine inspir'd,
Whose body oft the pangs of hunger felt,
Whose mind sublime poetic raptures fir'd.

Mean was his garb, and many a hideous rent,
Expanding, flutter'd in the wint'ry storm,
While his lean chops, and drooping beaver lent
A twofold horror to his meagre form.

No rich utensils, form'd with art and cost,
His airy household furniture composed;
One cobweb'd couch, and table all its boast,
This where he eat, and that where he repos'd.

Indulging fancy's visionary flight,
Or rapt in extacy of thought sublime,
Oft would he sit and muse the live-long night,
Scratching his head, to find some wretched rhyme.

Or poring on some old moth-eaten book,
Some ancient bard, deep skill'd in classic lore,
With many an eager &mdash; many an ardent look,
Would he, each shining sentiment explore.

If e'er his heart, one glow of pleasure knew,
'Twas but in dreams of future prospects bright;
If e'er one hope sprung &mdash; 'twas when fancy flew,
And reach'd a grace beyond her usual height.

Hope may a while, with sweet enlivening beams,
Shoot balmy comfort thro' the breast of Care;
But who can feast upon her airy dreams?
What bard grow fat on unsubstantial air?

So thought the poet, as he sat forlorn,
One hapless night, (for many such had he,)
Oft sighing, wish'd he for th' approach of morn&mdash;
And oft he wish'd, that morn he ne'er might see.

Dark was the night, and loud the tempest's howl,
Thro' broken tiles the rushing torrents fell;
No goblet smil'd to cheer his drooping soul,
No crumb had he his hunger to dispel!

"Wretch that I am, exclaim'd he in despair,
Dead to myself, and to my country lost;
Is this fruit of all my studious care?
Is this the fame ambition made its boast?

"Had but these hands been taught some useful art,
To serve the world, and for my wants provide,
Fierce hunger thus had never gnawed my heart,
Nor this mean garb hung tatter'd at my side.

"This head, now stor'd with many a fulsome cant,
Of heroes, gods, and bards of ancient times,
More might have had at life's last hour to vaunt,
Than idly musing, stringing useless rhymes.

"In boldly pleading for the oppressed's cause,
Or truth expounding from its sacred page,
More might have gain'd of honour and applause,
Than vending flatt'ry, praise, and party rage.

"The laugh of fops, th' unworthy's cruel scorn,
The critic's malice, and the proud's disdain,
Have, in my bosom, planted many a thorn,
To wound my peace, and fill my life with pain.

"Spurn'd from the door of grandeur and of power,
If for a promis'd favour, cringing low,
Or seiz'd by bailiffs in some evil hour,
And thrown in dungeon dark to pine in woe.

"The gay companions of my happier days,
Whose flatt'ring tongues prov'd to my heart a charm,
Forgetful now to pay their wonted praise,
Shrink from my presence, as they would from harm.

"Oft at my board I've seen them joyful sit,
Nor speak a word, nor think a thought but mine;
While each fond heart seem'd to imbibe my wit;
And ah!  too much, each open'd mouth &mdash; my wine.

"But now I languish here, by all forgot,
My house is empty &mdash; still so full before;
My snuff-brown beaver, and my thread-bare coat,
Fright all these sun-shine flatt'rers from my door.

"Or, if I haply venture to the street,
At dusk of eve, or rising beam of morn,
Each gaudy painted courtesan I meet,
Sly peeping, smiles to see my breeches torn.

"From the rude insults of the low-born crowd,
The tinsel'd robe, the nodding plume, protect;
But my mean garb speaks poverty so loud,
To me, it yields nor safety, nor respect.

"Curs'd be that fame which I so lately priz'd,
To me the source of many a grievous sigh;
By friends deserted, and by foes despis'd,
I mourn unpitied &mdash; unlamented die!

"Cease, coward heart, forego these dastard fears,
Talk not of death in health and youthful bloom;
Tho' dismal, dark, the future now appears,
Some cheering ray may yet dispel the gloom.

"See in my chamber, erst so dark and drear,
Th' impurpl'd morning dart its orient ray;
Such yet may comfort, drooping fancy cheer,
And shed the beams of intellectual day.

"No more the muse, with fascinating power,
Shall bind my reason with her dazzling train;
Nor o'er the twinkling lamp, at midnight hour,
Call forth the wild effusions of my brain.

"Perish, ye dreams, delusive to my heart!
Which from th' unraptur'd gust of fancy flow;
Perish, ye apparatus of the art,
Ye objects instrumental of my woe!

"This book &mdash; this pen and ink &mdash; stand here, I take take,
My ready servants at the muse's call;
This book I tear &mdash; this grey-goose quill I break,
And dash this empty inkstand 'gainst the wall.

"No more impell'd by mad ambitious rage,
I'll strive for with'ring laurels to my head;
No more for flatt'ry swell the laboured page,
Or pant for glory &mdash; while I starve &mdash; for bread.

"What tho' this frame was ne'er inur'd to toil,
Might not these hands the shining weapon wield;
&mdash;Yet make their egress from this garret vile,
And serve their country in the tented field?

"Better to perish 'midst the stormy seas,
Or bleed with heroes on th' ensanguin'd plain,
Than lead a life of ignominious ease,
Oppress'd with hunger, poverty, and pain.

"The wretched votaries of the tuneful nine,
Tho' faint with hunger &mdash; tho' o'erpow'r'd with grief,
Must sink in sorrow &mdash; must in famine pine,
Unfit to toil &mdash; asham'd to ask relief.

"But the bold veteran, from the field of Mars,
Hops chearful on his yet remaining leg,
Talks of his valour &mdash; shews his honour'd scars&mdash;
Receives a pension; or gets leave &mdash; to beg."
