Son of the dust!  pale sorrow's child!
Why heaves thy breast with troubled sigh?
Pensive thy brow, demeanour wild,
Why starts the tear drop from thine eye?
Son of the dust!  thy grief declare,
Let sympathy thy sorrows share,
And may that Power who marks thy woe,
Dry the bitter tear which misery bids to flow.

"The rose in blooming beauty gay,
I saw, and marked the garden's ray,
Welcome the solar golden ray,
Its leaves, in sweet profusion spread&mdash;
&mdash;I looked again, &mdash; it was no more!
Vanished the form that charmed before,
Decayed its leaf, its lovely hue,
And all its scented fragrance fled like morning dew!

"In stately pride an oak arose,
Its branches mocked the idle storm,
Strong stood the trunk, the lofty boughs
With verdure crowned its noble form&mdash;
&mdash;How soon alas!  its strength decayed!
The gnawing worm dire ravage made,
Nipt were its roots, its leafy store,
Prone fell the lofty trunk, alas!  to rise no more!

"See thousand insects glittering gay,
Their wings with gold and purple beam,
Now sporting in the sunny ray,
Now darting o'er the silvery stream&mdash;
&mdash;By the rising blast at eve'
See them brushed into the wave,
Their fluttering hour of life is done,
And the whole gaudy tribe, alas!  for ever gone!

"Man in vigour's pride I've seen,
With courage beamed his daring eye,
His bosom glowed with ardour keen,
His towering spirit soared on high.&mdash;
&mdash;I looked again, &mdash; his breath was fled,
Cold on the earth his limbs were laid,
Without his strength, his manly bloom,
And his fair frame majestic hid in the grave's dull gloom.

"O tyrant Death!  relentless power!
Thou spoiler of the works of GOD!
All nature waits thy fatal hour,
And sinks into thy drear abode!
For this my tears incessant flow,
For this I heave the sigh of woe;
Nor can this heart e'er taste of joy,
Till nature lives anew, and death himself shall die."

Son of the dust!  thy grief forego!
Renounce pale Trouble's iron sway,
No more let Sorrow cloud thy brow,
Chase the dark'ning gloom away.
Full oft thy heart is torn with woe,
Full oft thine eyes with tears o'erflow,
But cheer thy heart, and dry thine eye,
"For Nature lives anew, and Death himself shall die."

I too beheld the blushing flower
Hang it's fair head in mournful guise,
It's short-lived day of beauty o'er,
The lovely form in ruin lies.&mdash;
&mdash;I looked again, &mdash; it bloomed anew,
Again in leafy pride it grew,
The stem with budding blossoms crowned,
Wide o'er the verdant glade it threw its fragrance round.

Sinking into Ocean's bed,
His glory veiled in sable gloom,
See the Sun's gay radiance fled,
No more his beams the globe illume.&mdash;
&mdash;I looked again, &mdash; bright from the east,
In cloudless light his orb increased,
Chased the midnight shades away,
While the lark hails melodious the glorious god of day.

Thus shall thy life, O man!  revive,&mdash;
Again the vital spark shall burn,
The dust that died again shall live,
And every active power return.
Thy glory veiled, thy spirit fled,
But soon the Day-spring shines on high,
And the glad soul awakes to taste eternal joy.

Blest son of heaven!  no longer mourn,
No longer rend thy heart with woe;
But hail with joy the happy bourne
Where Sorrow's stream shall never flow.
Immortal!  see the tyrant dies,
In ruin plunged the spoiler lies,
Vanquished his might, his triumph o'er,
While Virtue heaven-ward springs, and lives to die no more!
