While silent Night fills her meridian throne,
And sons of riot revel unconfin'd;
By Luna's silver light, I make my moan,
Unheard, I breathe my sorrows in the wind.

In plaintive accents, thro' the midnight air,
For former crimes I, now forsaken, mourn;
Fain with my life would I resign my care,
And find content which here can ne'er return.

False, perjur'd man, thou source of all my woes,
Thou first seducer from fair virtue's way:
To thee my heart ascribes its lost repose,
Thou first didst teach my tender mind to stray

When young, unconscious of the fatal dart
Which at my breast her misery was thrown,
When guardless from the pain love's stings impart,
My fatal flame I did not blush to own;

When in thine arms my panting frame was prest,
When on thy neck my head, at ease, reclin'd;
O, then what tumults startled in my breast!
What trembling joys disturb'd my ardent mind!

Ye prudes, to censure be not too severe,
Nor judge the worst of her who thus has stray'd;
Tho' virtue's boughs with tenderness we rear,
By passion's storms the branches may be sway'd.

But know, ye fair, when guilty transports glow,
A moment's joy may bring an age of pain;
For fleeting pleasures, tears may ceaseless flow,
And future years be only to complain.

The tongue of slander blackens all our crimes;
Malice remarks where prostitution dwells;
One foolish step survives to distant times,
And every hope of further bliss repels.

Thou sweet companion of each helpless hour,
Little intruder on my former joy,
Child of my woes, whose bosom yet is pure,
Whose mind no passions beat, nor cares annoy;

Taught by thy mother, shun the cruel snares,
Which harden'd men for innocence do weave;
Fly from the bait which subtilty prepares,
Nor trust to man, who always will deceive.

Had I a mother &mdash; why do I repine?
Yet I must mourn &mdash; had I a parent near,
To hear my tale, to soothe my life's decline,
And from my cheek to wipe the glist'ning tear.&mdash;

But why a tear? &mdash; Long are these sources dry,
Long, long alas!  my tears have left their spring;
No fresh'ning moisture fills this parched eye,
No more, for me, these eyes such comforts bring.

O, thou dread Power!  whose love unbounded reigns,
Who o'er each want extends a parent's care,
With pity view, O, view a daughter's pains,
By hard oppression driv'n to black despair.

If human bosoms e'er can share my grief,
Give but one heart my hapless fate to know,
One gen'rous mind, to give me some relief,
To ease my sorrows, or to share my woe.
