DEAR WILL, I have sat down to pen you a letter,
And as rhyme will go off so much smoother and better
Than dull rambling prose, I have set about stringing
The few thoughts I have, to go dancing, and singing;
In light leaping friskiness skipping about,
As the rhymes I find them to twist their way out!
I could deem myself now, to think flatt'ringly on't,
Like that dear merry creature, verse-loving Leigh Hunt,
Sitting down to pen stanzas for Moore or Lord Byron,
Full of fine-hearted chearfulness, never to tire on;&mdash;
But, alas!  unlike him, while I'm seeking a rhyme,
To come smilingly in with a musical chime,
And bring out my bright thoughts with a swell to the ear,
Full-sounding an fine, like a symphony clear,&mdash;
I find &mdash; but the devil knows wherefore &mdash; mean time,
That the thought has slipt out, just as in slips the rhyme;
And ten chances to one that the two ever meet
In a stanza at once &mdash; 'twould be too great a treat!
But take them, my dear boy!  for better or worse,
And when sense is a-wanting, just put up with verse!

It won't look too flatt'ring, I hope, now to tell you,
That with all your fine spirit and fancies, so well you
Have touch'd on my heart, my dear Will, that, God bless you,
You'd wonder what torture 'tis to me to miss you!
How oft I look round when I hear the door open,
Half expecting to see your queer visage come pop in;
Looking big as a young breeding wench, with some jest,
Which might pass for true wit, if 'twere never express'd;
And when in swims, instead, that sweet model of Venus,
Whose beauties from all other women might wean us,
Bringing tea or supper to me, a lone elf,
With what longing, oft-times, do I say to myself,
"Good God!  what I'd give now, to have him come in so,
Hitching up his lank shoulders, and pitching his chin so,
How well I would suffer his heats and his spleens,
His tetchy ill tempers, his twistings and grins,
And smooth them all off by the way that I took them,
Till even himself then no longer could brook them!
How I'd writhe myself into a laugh at his wit,
Task hardest of any!  or patiently sit,
Till his faults should all fret themselves off into rest,
Leaving just some small stings of regret in my breast,
To give the rich after-scene flavour and zest!"

Oh!  at such times, what choice feasts of nectar were ours!
How we bask'd amid sunshine, and revell'd in flow'rs!
How Shakespeare's deep soul was all pour'd out before us,
And Fletcher's rich riots of luxury ran o'er us!
And Spencer's far-floating strain swell'd in melody by,
Lapping all in Elysium!  How Milton's high song,
Like the grand Ocean's voice, when the loud winds are strong,
Came rolling abroad, yet oft melted away
In sweet murmuring tones, like the summer wave's play!
How Wordsworth shed out from his soul's inner shrine,
A new light upon Nature, pure &mdash; lovely &mdash; divine,&mdash;
Twining round every flower that looks up for our sight,
Some deep dream of love &mdash; some warm-thoughted delight;&mdash;
And gleaning the "stray gifts" of beauty that lye
Scatter'd wide o'er the world, for the soul's purer eye
Pour'd them back on our hearts, in a deep-flowing tone
Of such rapturous beauty, as made them his own!
Then how Coleridge, sage poet, and orator too,
Wild weaver of visions, soul-startling and new,
Would strike from his mystic harp sounds of stranger wonder,
That shake the deep soul like the low muttering thunder,
And, in their wild swellings of melody seem
Like a voice from the dim realm of Phantom and Dream!
Yet sweet and high thoughts too, would blend in the song,
And swim on the wings of proud Music along;
And deep tones of love, through the fine-rolling numbers,
Breathe sweetly and purely as Infancy's slumbers!
Lloyd's sickly night-mares we'd no time to spare for,
And monkish Bob Southey we none of us care for;
But leaving all such for a truer humanity,
Pure and unhaunted by sick dreams or vanity,
How we'd turn us to Nature's own nursling, John Keats!
And revel deep, deep on his nectarious sweets;
Drinking in the warm beauty, the tremulous graces,
The rich lights, and sweet odours, and glow of bright faces,
Sky-tinted, whose magical influence blended,
Pours on earth the full bliss of the Heaven he's ascended!
How we'd bask in that luscious, yet delicate dream
Of sweet Madeline, steep'd in the beautiful gleam
Of the blessed moonlight, while her lover stood by!
Or list the long-breathing and odorous sigh,
Which swells from the kind poet's heart as he's weeping,
With deep-thoughted grief, o'er fair Isabel, keeping
Her sweet Basil wet with her tears! &mdash; then how long
Would we brood o'er that lovely and tender night-song,
Which pours such a warm gush of sorrow, touch'd finely
With all that makes human grief soften divinely,
Into a still heart-wrapping beauty of feeling,
And turns into balm all the woe it is stealing;
Where the notes come all panting and trembling in gushes,
And blend with each other like beautiful flushes
Of rich golden light, on a sweet eve of autumn,
When the quivering heads of the bright flowers have caught 'em.

&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;
&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;

How oft, when the long summer evenings come on,
And the low panting breeze, with a sweet-swelling tone,
Creeps windingly round me, scarce rustling my curls,
And fawns o'er my cheek, like that cheek of my girl's!
When the green leaves are stirr'd with mysterious tones,
That come swimming and fainting, in tremulous moans,
With a half-dreary melody roaming around,
And sighing away ere they pass into sound;
When the wide sky, in stillness and depth of repose,
Touch'd with warm-breathing hues, like a maiden's cheek glows,
In rich slumber, spell-bound by a vision of love,
That steals down o'er her heart from the palm-bowers above;
When the languid perfumes of the wall-flow'rs and roses
Swell soft to my sense, and the murmuring closes
Of the far peasant's song, like a voice from some isle
Of Arcadian loveliness, steep the warm smile
That has risen o'er my cheek in a heart-longing tear,&mdash;
How oft do I whisper, "Oh!  would he were here!"
And then, in these glorious mornings dear Will,
How I long for you back, to walk out with me still!
When Milton's own sky swells in majesty o'er me,
And Wordsworth's sweet daisy is glinting before me,
And Chaucer's own sunshine is sparkling about,
And Hunt's tender heart's ease looks "gleamingly" out,&mdash;
(Like the love-breathing eye of a girl that you know,
When my beating cheek sleeps on her bosom of snow!)
When Coleridge's myrtle springs light from its stalk,
And all other fine flowers are brightening my walk,
Which the poets have sung to their merry heart-dances,
And tipp'd with new tints from their delicate fancies,&mdash;
When Keats's dear spirit, immortally fair,
In a flush of warm beauty floats by on the air,
Waving sighs of delicious love from his wings,
And pouring all Heaven in the song that he sings;
Breathing dew on the roses and nectarious balm,
And stirring with low tones of beauty the palm,
That trembles and heaves to the deep-thrilling sighs,
And waves its broad leaves o'er the sounds as they rise;
And when o'er me the morning lark revels in song,
And swims on the proud breeze that sways him along,
His quivering wings bath'd in the sparkling sun-light,
And trembling all o'er with a flush of delight;&mdash;
Then conquering each check by the warm pulse of love,
Swells up like a thought to the blue Heaven above!
Oh God!  could I breathe in my verse but one note
Of the warm gushing sweetness that streams from my throat!
Could I catch but one tone of such eloquent love
As stirs the pure heart of that sky-lark above,
And is pour'd o'er the wide list'ning air that all glows
In a deep hushing trance of low-breathing repose,
And thrill'd with fond stirrings of love by the measure,
In murmuring and trembling, and blushing with pleasure!
Ah!  then I might sing, and my song might call forth
The warm pulses of good that lie stiffled in earth!
Might wake the high thought that now slumbers, and fill
With the deep stream of love hearts all torpid and chill!

But you know these high fancies are out of my way,
And my sluggish soul lyes so bedaub'd in its clay,
That would old Dr. Slop take the trouble to try,
He could mount on his Fancy's wings higher than I!
There are others (thank God for't!) whose proud swelling thought
On the fine wings of Fancy can mount up and float
In the pure fields of ether, afar from the mud
Of this dim dirty world; and who pour forth a flood
Of such beautiful dreamings, as may kindle and cheer
Even the chill dusty souls that are toiling on here!
One soother and softener, too, Heaven has placed
By our sides on the earth, like a flower in the waste,
That sheds its still odours, and sweetens the gale,
That breathes o'er the dim brow all rugged and pale,
Smoothing off every wrinkle that care has plow'd o'er,
And breathing the warm hue of health there once more!
Ah!  when Nature has touch'd with her spirit the face,
And moulded each movement to frankness and grace,
And nested her brood of kind thoughts in the breast,
What a creature is woman! &mdash; how blessing and blest!
What a halo of love o'er her image is cast,
That plays round the present, and brightens the past!
How she tempers man's turbulent spirit to bear,
And makes the home heaven which is given to her care!

But you see I am nibbling at subjects too high,
So, to check it at once, I must bid you good-bye.
