The sun had left Britannia wrapt in night,
On western world to shed his morning light;
His fervid beams shone on Darien's shore,
To Scotsmen fatal in the days of yore,
On royal William's name which stamps a blot,
By Caledonia's children unforgot;
Not distant far from this ill-fated land,
Where Nature owns no cultivator's hand,
Where blackening forests cast a lasting shade,
No flowery vale, green field, nor opening glade,
Nor hills with flocks, nor herds in verdant glen,
Nor curling smoke, to mark the haunts of men;
But tangling thickets hide the wily snake,
Foul birds of prey scream nightly in the brake;
From secret lairs comes many a frightful cry,
And burning suns shine in a cloudless sky.

'Twas on that hapless spot, by fraud betray'd,
A group of wretched emigrants were laid,
Decoy'd from Scotia's glens and peopled shore,
And doom'd, too late, their rashness to deplore:
The sun was vertical, his downward ray
Shed on their heads "intolerable day;"
Their limbs were stiff with night-dew's fatal damp,
And painful toil to form their little camp:
There fathers, mothers, youths, and children young,
Grief swell'd each heavy heart, thirst parch'd each tongue;
Each cheek was pale with want and wasting care,
And every look was dismal, dark despair.
With aching brows, stretch'd on the long rank grass,
The languor of their lingering hours to pass,
Two hapless youths the dreary silence broke,
Of friends, and home, and former days, they spoke;
Both seem'd their reckless folly to bemoan
With bitter tears &mdash; one James, the other John:
A wedded pair, too, mourn'd their sad mishap,
A meagre child lay on the mother's lap,
About her heaving breast the infant clung,
Her drooping head in sad dejection hung;
Yet she would raise her dim, desponding eye,
And gaze upon two little lispers by;
In mournful music, hush her babe to sleep&mdash;
Kiss its pale cheek &mdash; then turn her head and weep.
James first to mourn their hapless fate began,
The others listening &mdash; thus the converse ran:

JAMES.
"Is this the genial clime, the promis'd land,
The scene display'd by false enchanter's wand?
For ever flown the dreams in slumbers shed,
When bright illusions hover'd o'er my head;
When scudding light before the wanton breeze,
Or struggling hard to stem tempestuous seas;
Was it for this that we invok'd the gale,
On deserts drear our fortune to bewail?
Was it for this I left Edina's shore&mdash;
That happy land my feet shall tread no more&mdash;
Left friends, who long had o'er my follies mourn'd,
Their griefs despis'd &mdash; their wisest counsels scorn'd?
The gay companion of a thoughtless train,
All, like myself, young, idle, pert, and vain;
I deem'd that Pleasure's sweets would never cloy
Her varied scenes of loose, licentious joy;
Headstrong and proud &mdash; impatient of control,
The gambler's table and the toper's bowl
For me had still resistless, winning charms,
And venal beauty lured me to her arms:
I knew her purpose was but to beguile,
Yet sought her wanton glance and syren smile,
Saw poison sparkle in a gilded cup,
And revelling o'er the draught, I drank it up;
Till steeped in sin, insensible to shame,
With empty purse, lost health, and blighted fame;
Without a friend with strength and skill to save,
Or drag me from stern Ruin's whelming wave,
I bade a long &mdash; I fear a last adieu,
To all erewhile so lovely to my view!
Methinks I hear my sister's rending sighs,
And see the tear-drops streaming from her eyes;
Still feel the pressure of my brother's hand,
As my light foot left Lothian's fertile strand;
At sea, as on my sleepless couch I turn'd,
I thought of tender admonition spurn'd;
With fix'd resolve to close my wild career,
On Virtue's stream with struggling oar to steer;
And when I long had brav'd the stormy blast,
Seek friend and home, and soothe them for the past.

"Alas!  it was a dream &mdash; illusion vain!
Nor friends nor home shall I behold again!
Too late I o'er my reckless folly sigh:
Though unprepar'd, doom'd in this wild to die;
For keen Remorse my anguish'd bosom wrings,
And Conscience tortures with her scorpion stings!
Would outrag'd Heav'n but condescend to save
A guilty wretch from an untimely grave,
Methinks I would &mdash; but ah!  my doom is pass'd,
My spirits sink, and death approaches fast,
And I must fall, where none shall heave a sigh,
Above the nameless spot where I forgotten lie!"

JOHN.
"Although no pang of guilt my bosom tears,
Yet in my face egregious Folly stares;
Her laugh exulting, and her sneer of scorn,
Have poignance sharper than the piercing thorn;
For I have been her dupe &mdash; her ready tool&mdash;
A credulous, unthinking, giddy fool!
Though not with Fortune's gifts profusely bless'd,
Yet pinching Poverty had ne'er oppress'd;
I ne'er with guilt nor care was doom'd to pine,
And youth, and health, and competence were mine;
But lust of wealth had long possess'd my mind,
And I had wish'd some richer shore to find,
Some fairy-land, some El Dorado clime,
Where Nature ever smil'd in virgin prime;
Where wanton Spring and Summer still were seen
Blending their sweets in rich perennial green;
Where golden harvests on the genial soil
A hundred fold rewarded labour's toil.

"Like Satan, seeking whom he might devour,
MACGREGOR met me in an evil hour;
His hook was baited with a golden fly,
The shark &mdash; ah no! &mdash; the simple gudgeon I!
Who, reckless, took no time to think or pause,
And now I writhe, the barb deep in my jaws!

"Though Hope on tiptoe stood, with anxious eye,
And Expectation in my heart beat high,
A momentary sadness swell'd my heart,
When from my native land my friends to part;]
And there was one &mdash; ah!  dearer than the rest,
Whose image lives within this aching breast,
I press'd her hand &mdash; but could not say "farewell!"
While on that trembling hand a tear-drop fell:
On wings of love I only went before,
In search of Eden, on some blissful shore;
For her, in Paradise, to build a home,
Where Love should reign, and Care should never come!
Alas!  the spell's dissolv'd &mdash; the dream is fled!
With throbbing veins, sick heart, and aching head,
I wish to die &mdash; to meet my hapless doom,
While some kind hand is left to dig my tomb."

HUSBAND.
"Ye sad companions in affliction's hour,
Dark are the gathering clouds that round us lower;
Our fate is hard &mdash; I've heard you both repine,
Yet are your suff'rings light compar'd to mine;
Whate'er your sorrows, they are yours alone,
No better half re-echoes back your groan!
See her, now seated, sickening, at my side,
Twelve years ago she was my blushing bride;
Her glowing cheek, ripe lip, and melting eye,
Were sweeter far than summer's morning sky;
Both young, our hopes were high, our hearts were warm,
For Love and Plenty bless'd our little farm;
But times soon alter'd, markets still declin'd,
Our landlord poor, prov'd sordid and unkind;
Each year but added to our deep distress,
And every day still made our little less;
We sigh'd, and from impending ruin fled.
Like you, deceiv'd, too rashly dar'd to roam,
To seek a safe retreat, a shelt'ring home.
See Mary's pallid cheek and wasted form,
Behold the infant on her breast that lies,
And mark the faded lustre of her eyes;
These younglings seated round their mother's feet,
That bloom'd erewhile like opening rosebuds sweet,
Now weak their limbs, and fled each rising grace,
Sickness and famine blanches every face!
No hope remains but here alone to die,
And on the turf our bones unburied lie!
But as they bleach beneath a torrid sun,
May shapes terrific, shades and horrors dun,
Nightly surround the author of our woes,
And our pale ghosts still haunt him in repose!
If to his home he should again return,
May friends forsake him, and his kinsmen spurn!
Let him, like me, in lonely desert die,
And let his bones in dust unhallow'd lie;
Above his turf may never heathbell wave,
Nor dews of morn, nor daisy deck his grave!
But there may&mdash;"

WIFE.
"Hush!  that bitter curse recal!
Although thy heart now writhes in anguish'd thrall,
Leave him, the wretched author of our pain,
To Him who can the wrath of man restrain:
Or rather, raise your heart and hands to Heav'n,
In fervent prayer, that he may be forgiv'n;
And while you o'er our present sorrows pine,
Still learn to trust Omnipotence Divine;
For He who sits enthron'd above the sky,
Sees all His creatures with Omniscient eye;
The crowded city, and the trackless shore,
The gorgeous temple, and the desert hoar&mdash;
The dark abyss, the forest's gloomy shades,
His presence fills, His providence pervades.
Our Father may His face and favour hide,
But not for aye, if we in Him confide;
Let us His wisdom, pow'r, and goodness own,
And look for Mercy where our wants are known!"

Even while she spoke, a sail appear'd in view,
And as they wistful gaz'd, still nearer drew;
A party lands &mdash; the victims crowd around&mdash;
Kneeling with lifted hands, and prayers profound;
The faltering tongue, parch'd lip, and faded cheek,
In silent eloquence their sorrows speak!
Their wretchedness the visitors deplore,
And lead the wanderers from that dreary shore.
