While yellow Harvest smiles along the plain,
And Labour's cheerful hum re-echoes wide,
Sequestered here, I muse in pensive strain,
Amidst the wreck of sublunary pride.

Could Fancy's hand unfold the roll of Time,
These trembling towers in wonted pride would rise,
With Pleasure's strain the Muse's note should chime,
And regal glory dazzle vulgar eyes.

The humble bard who lingers here alone,
Had former ages led his footsteps near,
When royal JAMES in princely splendor shone,
Might haply, deemed that bliss was centered here.

The courtly retinue that poured abroad;
The smile of Majesty, at distance seen
The winning charms, on Beauty's cheek that glowed,
When gazing rustics thronged to hail their Queen;

There was a time, when these, with magic spell,
Diffused their fascinating influence round;
Bade many a heart with fancied triumph swell,
And deem these domes with endless glory crowned,

Where I, a solitary stranger, stray,
My rude notes echoed from the mouldering walls,
No ear to listen to my plaintive lay,
While midnight silence even the Muse appals,

Might not erewhile, some happier Minstrel stand,
While princely Pride, and Beauty thronged around,
In courtly guise to praise the Harper's hand,
And hang enraptured on each melting sound?

Within these walls, by Time's rude hand defaced,
Whose fallen fragments crumble round the pile,
The vestige of that chamber might be traced,
Where slaves obsequious sought their master's smile.

How changed the scene &mdash; the pageantry of power,
That veiled mortality from vulgar eyes,
Whose lustre dazzled for a transient hour,
Lost in the gulph of dark oblivion lies!

Here must the gentle tongue its strain forget,
No fawning sycophant is seen to bend;
No venal face in studied guise is set,
To flatter Princes, or betray a Friend.

And even these hallowed courts, where grateful choirs,
With glowing breasts, loud Hallelujahs sung,
No more shall echo to devotion's fires;
Time teaches silence with his cankering tongue.

'Midst the lone precincts of that dreary dome,
Heart-soothing harmony once reared her throne;
But ah!  'tis now the noxious reptile's home,
And there, the bird of night oft pours her moan.

On grandeur's tomb, see dark funereal yews,
In solemn pride, and gloomy verdure mourn;
O'er Time's rude havoc drop their baneful dews,
And spread their leaves, to shade its mouldering urn.

Say, boots it aught, that these neglected halls,
Golconda's gems in richest hue displayed?
Or, that these solitary moss-clad walls,
From Persian looms were gorgeously arrayed?

The bosom white as Alpine virgin snows,
That gave these jewels lustre as they shone,
Where Princes sighed to gain a short repose,
Dissolved in dust, sleeps silent, and unknown!

The sparkling crown, the tinselled garb of state,
The sceptred arm, no more their influence shed;
Where Princes sat, each nod dispensing fate,
The bloated spider weaves his loathsome bed.

Avails it aught, that Luxury with her train
Of sons voluptuous, in loose pleasures rolled?
No longer now, the sparkling cup they drain!
And here, the throbbing pulse of Love lies cold!

These yawning vaults, where damp and darkness reign,
Forbid the Muse's pensive lay to close;
For Pity claims (though rude the artless strain,)
The tribute due to hapless ROTHSAY'S woes.

He who for Scotia stretched his youthful arm,
Who saved Edina from a plunderer's hand,
Whose bosom glowed with indignation warm,
To heal the woes that hovered o'er the land;

Even he must fall &mdash; not as the mighty fell,
Where shouts of victory soothed departing life;
By treacherous hate, condemned to yonder cell,
The helpless victim of a traitor's strife.

Shall Truth assume the Grecian painter's veil?
Or blot the picture from the roll of Fame?
The Muse reluctantly, pursues her tale,
That stamps with infamy a tyrant's name!

Yes, ruthless ALBANY &mdash; scorn of the brave!
To latest ages shall the tale descend;
Despised in life &mdash; detested in the grave;
Even there, no hero's dust with thine shall blend!

Oh!  curs'd refinement of a tyrant's art,
A prey to Death in dreadful form arrayed;
The vulture famine, tugging at his heart,
Gay youth and health sunk to a ghastly shade.

Oh!  why could Luxury her riots keep,
And with her revellings torture ROTHSAY'S ear?
Where did the thunders of just vengeance sleep,
When ruthless tyranny refused to hear?

The matron kind, who brought a short relief,
And from her breast the balmy nectar gave;
The generous maid, who tried to soothe his grief,
Were doomed with ROTHSAY to the unhonoured grave.

But why unhonoured? &mdash; Airy forms unseen,
Shall bless the spot where Pity's votaries lie
And patriot shades, shall clothe his turf in green,
Who firm in Virtue, bravely dared to die.

With solemn pause, I close the tragic tale;
And mark these towers, now trembling in decay,
Whose echoes murmuring to the evening gale,
In sadness whisper what the Muse would say.

Think ye, who ceaseless toil for wealth and power,
Or light along the stream of Pleasure flow,
Ambition's summit, and the roseate bower,
Must sink, at Ruin's unrelenting blow.

Alike, if from the sudden shaft of Fate,
Destruction ride on the red lightning's wing;
Or imperceptible, Time linger late,
The stroke is sure, from his unerring string.

Yet, while I mourn the splendid structure's doom,
I blame not Fate's immutable decrees;
Let Reason pause, o'er Grandeur's lonely tomb,
Nor rashly censure, what she dimly sees.

Perhaps, when Power in princely glory blazed,
And Wealth around her nameless luxuries spread,
Some care-worn hind with envious bosom gazed,
And spurned the comforts of his humble shed.

The youthful peasant clothed in russet gray,
With brawny arm, who plowed the stubborn soil,
Who joyous, hailed the beam of early day,
And whistled blithe to cheer his constant toil,

To Discontent perhaps, was forced to yield;
Nor looked exulting o'er his labours done,
When proud dependents idled o'er his field,
Their tinseled liveries glittering in the sun.

The winding stream, that works its constant way,
Will sap the banks it gently seems to lave;
Till from its brink the shrub with verdure gay,
Is hurried off by the insidious wave.

So splendid crowds, deep versed in courtly guile,
Chace calm Contentment from the humble plain;
And rural Virtues soon forget to smile,
Where Sloth reclines, and wanton Pleasures reign.

Methinks, some sprite amidst these ruins drear,
Now marks the Muse's melancholy lay;
Some restless spectre, sadly hovering near,
Exulting nightly as these domes decay:

Haply, the shade of some ill-fated fair,
Whose breast was pure as Virtue's spotless shrine,
Lured from the plain, by Grandeur's specious glare,
Betrayed &mdash; deserted &mdash; in Despair to pine!

That lonely violet, drooping, and forlorn,
In this lone walk that sheds its sickly bloom,
Whose languid head meets no blest ray of morn,
Seems the sad emblem of her hapless doom.

Near the bleak spot, where springs this fragrant flower,
There, haply, Love first bade her bosom swell;
Even this, perhaps, was the enchanted bower,
Where treachery triumphed, and where virtue fell!

May not her early grave unnoticed rise?
Perhaps, my feet her mouldering dust have pressed!
This tear may drop, where the sad victim lies,
And wet the floweret blushing on her breast!

Such are the woes that Luxury may have wrought,
When these gray ruins firm in greatness stood:
Though bards have sung, and moralists have taught,
That private wrong produces public good.

Here let me pause &mdash; far in the glowing west,
Now slowly fades the beam of closing day;
The shades are deepening on the mountain's breast;
The drowsy owl nods on the dewy spray.

Still glows the day-star's train of purple light,
That saw these towers in grandeur meet the morn;
He keeps his path, in wonted glory bright,
The mansion stands deserted, and forlorn.

Time speeds his course &mdash; successive ages roll;
Race follows race, and empires rise and fall;
Even constant Nature hastens to the goal,
An era pregnant with the change of all.

How vain the splendor of terrestrial things!
A fleeting meteor in a wintry sky;
The Poet's fame the pomp, and power of Kings,
Are phantoms, fading from the gazer's eye!
