JEANY.
Say, Sandy, say, what gloomy clouds o'ershade
Thy darken'd brows?  Not thus thy once dear maid
Thou wanted'st to approach:  chearful and gay
You always came, with sorrow went away:
Speak:  What's the matter?  hast thou seen a ghost?
Hast thou thy father or thy mother lost?
Or, has some other lass, more artful, stole
Thy fickle heart, and dup'd my silly soul?

SANDY.
No, Jeany, no; sooner shall GORDON'S name
Lye undistinguish'd in the page of fame;
Sooner shall MAXWELL'S merit be forgot,
And Scottish annals fail to boast of Scot:
Sooner shall youth and beauty cause disgust,
And virtue join'd with wisdom be unjust,
Than to my Jeany I inconstant prove,
My first, my last, my everlasting love!
Do thou, my sweet, an equal flame confess;
'Twill soothe my pain, and make my sorrow less.

JEANY.
When lawyers cease to cheat, and doctors kill;
Parsons preach peace, and women's tongues be still;
When av'rice leaves the rich, and pride the poor;
When Dobie swears, and Planny drinks no more;
When Godsman grows devout, and Brander wise;
When Innes scolds not, Archy tells no lies;
When ***'s widow complaisance can plead;
When Burgess wafts the traveller with speed;
When rapid Spey runs backward from the sea,
Then, not till then, shall Jeany faithless be.

This point secure, without delay impart
Whate'er it is that galls thy aching heart.

SANDY.
Ah!  Jeany, Jeany, the sad news I bear
Down thy soft cheek shall force the briny tear!

Our noble master and his lovely spouse
To morrow morn abandon yonder house,
And move to warmer climes.&mdash;

JEANY.
Support us heav'n!
Sad are, indeed, the news that thou hast giv'n!&mdash;
But, Sandy, 'tis perhaps a groundless fear;
You must now credit ev'ry thing you hear.
So many lies abroad, we scarce can know
What things are certain from what are not so.

SANDY.
Incred'lous!  if you doubt, go to the street,
And read the truth in ev'ry face you meet;
In ev'ry face see signs of artless woe,
And deep disaster reign where e'er you go;
Each age, each rank, condition and degree,
The high, the low, the bond-man and the free;
Fathers and mothers, girls and beardless boys;
Maids, matrons, widows mix their common sighs:
E'en speechless infants testify their grief
In sullen show, and seem to seek relief.

JEANY.
No marvel &mdash; Each condition, rank, and age
Did ever their parental care engage.
The old, the young, the wealthy and the poor;
The great, the small, the citizen and boor:
All, all alike, might their protection claim;
To make all happy was their constant aim.

SANDY.
How kind his carriage, and how calm his words!
He wou'd not curse and threat as other lords;
Nor change, like petty squires, our christian names,
But call us "Jeany, Betty, Sandy, James;"
And ask us "how we did?  what news we brought?
Whence came we?  whither went?  or what we sought?"
None e'er apply'd to him, with just complaint,
Who was not sure to come away content.

JEANY.
How sweet her manner, affable her air!
No empty pride, nor haughty scorn is there;
But humble greatness, modest majesty,
Gracious good-nature, tender sympathy,
Sit on her matchless face &mdash; nor sit alone;
For ev'ry grace has there its native throne!
Seek Scotland, England, all the world around,
And such another fair shall not be found.

SANDY.
Who, now, shall cause improve the barren soil?
Who now reward the swain's industrious toil?
Who now shall stem the current, raise the mound,
And force the river to its ancient bound,
Erect new buildings, and new arches bend,
Raise new plantations, and new walls extend?
Bring welcome fuel from the distant shore,
Employ our idle and support our poor!

JEANY.
Who, now, will feed our hungry, clothe our bare?
Who for our sick the cordial drop prepare?
Explore our secret wants, explain our need;
Praise the deserving, for the guilty plead?
Who now with gen'rous boon will bribe our youth
To shun th' alluring charms of baneful sloth;
Encourage labour, diligence commend,
Worth recompence, and innocence befriend?

SANDY.
Alas!  we thought (but human thoughts are vain)!
They'd ne'er forsake these happy fields again:
We thought &mdash; what thought we not?  that this poor town
Would sudden rise to riches and renown,
Under their view &mdash; that sinking trade would thrive,
Arts rear their head, and dying commerce live;
Virtue take place of vice, injustice cease,
And dire debates conclude in lasting peace;
Dull ignorance be chac'd by learning's ray,
And indolence to industry give way;
We thought they'd all our nameless wrongs redress,
Avert all ills, and give us ev'ry bliss.

JEANY.
And so they will, for, sure, they ne'er intend
With kings and courtiers all their days to spend;
Yon rising walls, that course, that garden tell
That here they'll settle, here they mean to dwell.
What tho' at present, fate and George command,
Oblige our duke to leave his fav'rite land?
What tho' our duchess view her native spot,
Have they, for that, their Fochabers forgot?
Some weighty matter calls them:  when that's o'er,
They'll soon be back, and all our hopes restore.

SANDY.
Had they but left, to mitigate our care,
Yon lovely infant, more than angel fair,
Pleas'd with so sure a pledge of their return,
We'd wait with patience, and forget to mourn.
Charlotte ours, we soon shou'd see again
Both the fond parents on our happy plain.
Thus the bright star (the sun and moon away)
Cheers our dim night, and bids us look for day.

JEANY.
But, tell me, lad, what mother's tender heart,
Could with so dear a creature ever part?
Go, then, sweet babe!  and shew beyond the Forth,
How beautiful the roses of our North!
Go, shew Edina's celebrated toasts
What, far superior charms this country boasts!

But oh!  "be quick thy journey, short thy stay!"
Late ev'ry night, and early ev'ry day
Shall be our constant pray'r, till heav'n approve,
And bring us back the object of our love.
