A sad, a long farewell &mdash; dear, artless lyre!
My trembling hand now vainly strikes thy strings;
The frost of age has chilled my wonted fire;
No longer glides the stream from Fancy's springs:
And waving wide her raven-coloured wings,
Dull Melancholy hovers o'er my head;
Parent of phantom shapes, and shadowy things,
That crowd the path my weary feet must tread,
With visionary forms, of joys for ever fled.

For Mem'ry still, with fond regret, will rove
By sea-beat shore, gray rock, or winding stream;
Again she guides me to the woodland grove,
Where Fancy whispered many a youthful dream;
But ah!  it is the meteor's fleeting gleam,
Portentous, shooting o'er a stormy sky;
Where no kind star displays its cheering beam,
To glad the weary wanderer's hopeless eye,
Or point his trackless way, where dreary deserts lie.

For ah!  no more to me the boon is given,
To mark the varied charms of Nature's face;
Abroad, to breathe the balmy air of heaven,
My fond eye gazing over ample space:
From virgin Spring, to Autumn's matron grace,
To me, alas!  each blossom blows in vain;
No more my feet the mountain path can trace;
Nor brush the dew drops from the daisied plain;
My trembling limbs fast locked, in adamantine chain!

And yet, these limbs in chilling torpor bound,
A shade can startle &mdash; and a breath can shake;
The throbbing heart heaves at a passing sound,
As ruffling winds disturb the glassy lake:
At trivial ills the shattered frame will quake,
Each quivering nerve with keen sensation thrill
And feelings exquisite, to anguish wake,
The sigh, the tear; triumphing o'er the will,
While Reason vainly tries, to hush the tempest still.

Yet kind companion of my happier days,
Thou hast not scorned me in this evil hour;
Thy song has soothed me in the wildering maze,
And strewed my tiresome couch with many a flower.
Enchantress!  stay &mdash; haply, thy magic power
Again may chase my lingering hours of care;
May shew my sorrows, like an April shower&mdash;
A passing cloud, the pilgrim to prepare
For scenes of endless day, and skies for ever fair.

"Yes, thou the song of heaven born Hope can'st weave,"
Thy bright eye beaming with celestial day;
Thy whispers, softer than the breath of eve,
When setting sun-beams on the waters play:
Then touch the chord can soothe a child of clay,
Who struggling, seeks above his griefs to rise,
Set fair in sight, that pure ethereal ray,
Which guides the drooping mourner's downcast eyes,
To that calm haven of rest, prepared above the skies!
