Star of the dawn, fair harbinger of day!
With joy I view thy brightly-beaming eye,
Dart thro' the foggy clouds
That shade yon eastern hill;

While darkness rolling up her sable robe,
Slow to the west flies the approach of night,
O'er other realms to spread
Her beauty-sadd'ning veil.

Now a soft radiance steals along the sky,
By slow degrees; wide spreads the gather'd mist;
The broad horizon glows
With tints of lovelier hue.

And see!  emerging from the glowing wave
The sun advances; hence, ye fiends of night!
Ye shades of darkness, hence!
Make way for his approach.

And now, while seated on the mountain's brow,
I see him dart his all-reviving rays
Along the cottag'd plains,
Fresh meads and chrystal rills,

Permit me, morning meek, in artless strains,
Raptur'd, to hail thy lov'd return, and join
The sky-lark's early song,
In warbling forth thy praise.

At thy approach the vallies smile, the hills
Lift their green heads in light; the craggy cliffs
Erewhile so dark and drear,
And hung with gloomy mists,

Shine by thy magic influ'nce; ev'ry stream,
That rolls its wild waves down the heathy hills,
Glows bright beneath the ray
That morning darts around.

Now sounds the grove with music wildly sweet;
The blackbird deep retir'd in woodland shades,
Pours her clear warbled notes
In lonely ecstacy;

The linnet, charming songster, trills her lays
Of gratitude and love; fair morning!  all
The tenants of the grove
Thy much-lov'd presence hail!

On thee attend the Muses' sprightly train,
Fancy's young eye of transport; smiling hope
With dewy rose-buds wreath'd,
And love and genial joy:

With all the fairy forms the young bard views,
As haply thro' the dusky wood he roves,
Deep rapt in thought sublime,
And meditations high.

Nurse of each joy!  while Spring bedews thy locks
With vernal show'rs; while Summer decks thy brows
With ev'ry flow'ret sweet
That blooms beneath her care;

While ardent Autumn paints thy glowing cheek
With deeper blushes; and while winter wild
Surrounds thy rising head
With clouds and howling storms;

So long shall health at thy first call appear,
To range the mountains round, so long shall peace
Within thy low'ring groves
Delighted love to dwell.

And ev'ry youthful bard that tunes the lyre
To nature's charms shall oft be seen with thee
In contemplation's guise
Ranging the landscape o'er.
