Ye select few, who injur'd virtue mourn,
From that sad spectacle a moment turn;
This sketch accept, familiar, of a priest,
With parts and purity supremely blest:
Who neither fumbles at a party-scheme,
Nor to church-despotism lends his name;
But, unambitious, all his views confines,
To each whom heaven to his care consigns:
Anxious alone their welfare to secure,
Nor scrapes for wealth, nor scrambles to get pow'r.

Jest on the verge of yon extensive lawn,
Almost secreted, lives this holy man:
His manse obscure incircled is with trees,
And hedges screen it from the northern breeze:
A little village hard behind it lies,
On either side, birch, beech and hazel rise;
There gentle swains in innocence reside,
Here sylvan songsters in their tuneful pride:
Thus round his glebe eternal music reigns,
Nor is he deaf to such inchanting strains;
But, as the wing'd creation strike the key,
Congenial joins the sacred symphony.

A murm'ring brook glides softly by the door,
Where he, instinctive, meets the wand'ring poor:
His help is ready ev'ry time of need,
His soul exults in each benev'lent deed:
No one distress'd but finds in him a friend,
No case so desp'rate but he dares attend.

The beggars, stooping under want and years,
Cheer'd by his sympathy, forget their cares;
Repay the social, hospitable fare,
With grateful silence and a tender tear:
For long they trudged all the country o'er,
But never found such charity before.

The ruin'd virgin, the defrauded heir,
Both unsoliciting become his care;
The hamlets groaning under lordly pride,
In his good offices with joy confide;
Each helpless orphan, by his bounty fed,
Proclaims aloud the charitable deed.

A genius often hath he brought to light,
Who else had slept in everlasting night;
Neglected merit thus receives its due,
Then others cherish and esteem it too:
His eager eye, all o'er the teeming plain,
With kind distinction marks the active swain.

Thus Cephas lives, the friend of human-kind,
His manners frank, familiar, refin'd;
No stormy passions lurk within his breast,
Or lewd desires his placid soul molest;
Religion there her sacred influence sheds,
His soul enlightens, animates and aids:
No altercations irritate his mind,
Compress his feelings, or his judgment blind;
But all within is harmony and peace,
And all without retirement, love and ease.

The noblest objects his affections warm,
And virtue strikes him with a sacred charm;
He conquers prejudice without a sneer,
And gains by love whom others lose by fear;
No doubts perplex his well establish'd mind,
For faith in him is yet with reason join'd;
His feeling bosom for his people bleeds,
Their vice he censures, but relieves their needs.

Full oft unknown his eager wishes rise,
For timely succour from the pitying skies;
Propitious Heav'n to his sighs sincere,
As oft vouchsafing a condoling ear;
Recording angels mark the tears he sheds,
And show'r down blessings on the flock he feeds....

But see the genius of his art appear,
Supremely modest, and sublimely fair,
With solemn pomp, in beams of heav'nly light,
She onward bends upon the ravish'd sight:
Her air how elegant!  her motions neat,
Her form how comely!  and her eyes how sweet!
The radiant lustre of whose lovely face,
Beams inexpressible attractive grace;
Whose glossy ringlets negligently flow,
In waving ringlets to her skirts below:
Aethereal robes her virgin loins invest,
And streams of glory tremble round her breast;
An olive wreath adorns her sacred head,
And all the graces in her train succeed:
Peace leads the van, and Truth protects the rear;
There blossoms Hope, Fruition triumphs here.
The joys she gives are permanent and pure,
All, all her smiles eternal bliss secure.
These, these more tender than the nightly dew,
The blasted verdure of our souls renew:
Her words serener than the vernal song,
Which sweet responses every where prolong;
With softer notes dissolve the feeling heart,
And chaster fragrance to the soul impart.

Behold her beckon with a gracious mein,
And single Cephas from the vulgar train;
To him intent on some sublime design,
She, smiling, thus reveals her will divine:
"For me, a price immensely great was paid,
For me the Son of the Eternal bled!
Espouse my cause, the Gospel is my name,
And feed thy fires at my unfading flame:
For this I leave the bright abodes of day,
And deign a visit to the sons of clay;
To treat with men about their final doom,
From God's own bosom to the earth I come;
My presence glad'ning every mortal thing,
Diffuses round me an immortal spring:
See Grace behind me, Sorrow flies before,
At my approach, lo!  Misery is no more.
By me Hope bursts into a fervent flame,
And seizing, eager, on immortal fame,
Breathes in each breast that everlasting sigh,
Which gently whispers, "ye shall never die."
Whilst Faith, less timid, takes a bolder flight,
And darts aethereal in th' abyss of light.

"My sov'reign touch the bleeding conscience heals,
And chears the heart when ev'ry comfort fails.
By me the sinner may escape his doom,
And ev'n may triumph in a life to come.
Death, in my service, is a real friend,
Nor can the grave my votaries offend.
Admit me, then, the genius of thy art,
And recommend me to the feeling heart."
This said, the visionary stranger flies,
On wings cherubic, to her native skies.

So with his melancholy, faithful few,
The friend of men to Bethany withdrew,
While yet his presence gave 'em new delight,
A flowing cloud receives him from their sight.
Amaz'd, transported with the shining scene,
Their faith increas'd, their hopes became serene.
Thus Cephas, fir'd anew, resolves with care
The truth to vindicate, assert, declare.

The human heart he sets himself to learn,
And views its guilt with undisguis'd concern.
That dreaded labyrinth of all our woe,
From whence the kindred springs of mis'ry flow:
Redemption strikes him with peculiar force,
Because he dwells with rapture on its source.
'Tis here he meditates with true delight,
Where all the truth evolves upon his sight;
Where sin appears in every frightful view,
Its native horror full expos'd anew;
The only evil in existence found,
And but for which not hell itself could wound.
Infinite wisdom thro' the system shines,
Love prompting on as holiness refines;
While pow'r accomplishes what grace devis'd,
Truth, justice, goodness, all are exercis'd.
Man, happy man!  now desperate no more,
Hears with delight the voice he fled before.

Thus faithful Cephas joyful tidings bears,
And sounds salvation in the sinner's ears;
Vice grows more ugly as he paints her stains,
But Virtue sweetens in his lovely strains.
His modest, eloquent, persuasive art,
Alarms, controuls, and agitates the heart;
Who can behold him and remain unmov'd,
Retire uncharm'd, or listen unimprov'd?
His easy, earnest, captivating air,
Rebukes the frothy, strikes the base with fear:
He, too, detects the most retired vice,
Nor dreads to drag it from its dark disguise;
And yet so mild, his censures ne'er offend
An haughty patron or domestic friend.
His wit is delicate, although severe;
His stile sententious, elegant and clear;
Learn'd in each science of true classic taste,
Sublime in sentiment, in language chaste.

Blush, blush, ye quacks!  who make the truth a trade,
And but retail it for a bit of bread;
To cheat the very meanest of the mean,
Convert religion to corrosive spleen:
Ignobly fawn before the fickle herd,
Turn up the eye &mdash; but chuckling stroke the beard.
By archly feigning a condoling tear,
Their purses pilfer, and their secrets share:
Wolves!  who the harmless, hapless flock devour,
Whom fate subjects to such inhuman pow'r,
Soothe the soft bosoms of the am'rous fair
With notes adjusted to th' adult'rate ear.
Say, how can you behold his spotless fame,
And not sink under such a load of shame?
Did ever he capricious fortune chace,
Or for the tricks of priest-craft murder peace?
Catch at the breath of popular applause,
Or ever seem to be but what he was?
Witness, ye sorrowful!  for you he pray'd,
Ye sick who felt, confess his cheering aid;
Ye poor, his kind beneficence attest,
Tell, tell, ye wretched!  how his blessing bless'd.

Nor can his labours, so sincere, be vain,
His people's love repays their pastor's pain;
He tends their int'rest with a parent's eye,
And they requite him with a filial sigh.
Their eager cares are lessen'd by his love,
The flock he teaches terminates above.
His flock by him instinctively explore
Their way to heav'n &mdash; their shepherd goes before!

From him the clergy may improve their art,
From him be taught a more consistent part;
For even infidels his life revere,
Believe his piety, his faith sincere,
And own religion, as practis'd by him,
Devoid alike of apathy and whim.
