Fled from the mansions of the great and gay,
Where idle pleasure wastes her fleeting breath,
Thro' this sad cell I'll take my lonely way,
And view the havock made by time and death.

And, as I enter, let no swelling rage,
No thought impure my pensive bosom lead,
But sweet Religion all the man engage:
For this was once the sacred house of God.

Where oft Devotion, with her pious train,
In silent contemplation spent her days,
Or wak'd to extasy the glowing strain,
With grateful accents to her Maker's praise.

No more shall youth and beauty grace this shrine,
Or pious sages to the portal throng;
No more the arch shall meet the voice divine,
Receive the sound, or echo back the song.

The pride and glory of our country's fled,
The great supporters of the nation's laws,
The statesmen, heroes, and the kings are dead,
Who fought thro' fields of blood in freedom's cause.

Vast heaps of kindred here bestrew the ground,
And skulls and coffins to my view arise;
Here's friend and foe profusely scatter'd round,
And here a jaw, and there a thigh-bone lies.

Perhaps this hand has in some bloody fray,
With lofty sinews grasp'd the flaming brand,
Fought thro' the dreadful carnage of the day,
And drove oppression from its native land.

Yet fame and honour are but empty things,
The fleeting sunshine of uncertain day;
For statesmen, peasants, beggars, lords and kings,
All fall alike to cruel time a prey.

Tho' men, mere men, may unregarded rot,
And buried in their native dust consume,
Shall  Scotland's great commanders be forgot,
And moulder unregretted in the tomb.

Will no kind bard in grateful numbers sing
The mighty wonders of each hero's arm:
Will no kind friend protect a clay-cold king,
Collect his bones, and keep them safe from harm.

Would some sweet muse assist me in the song,
I'd dwell with rapture on the glowing strain,
Roll the smooth tide of harmony along,
Till echo undulate applause again.

When night's dark curtain hid the beams of day,
From those sad eyes my soul should banish sleep;
Again I'd raise the sympathetic lay,
And teach the fallen monuments to weep.

Ye sons of Scotland!  tho' you cannot raise,
Your long lost monarchs from the silent bier,
Their deeds are worthy of your highest praise,
And simple gratitude demands a tear.

For you they bore the faulchion and the shield,
For you each piercing winter blast they stood;
For you they struggl'd in the hostile field,
For you they welter'd in their crimson blood.

Let not base slander on their mem'ry fall,
Nor malice of their little faults complain;
They were such men, as, take them all in all,
We shall not look upon their like again.

Here lies the partner of the hero's bed,
Whose ev'ry feature wore unequall'd grace,
Can love's soft murmurs raise this death-struck head,
Or take the pale complexion from the face?

Go then, ye fair!  exert your utmost skill,
Employ each art to keep your beauty fast;
Try each perfume, use paint, do what you will,
Of this sad colour you must be at last.

Ah me!  how melancholy seem those walls,
To earth returning with a quick decay,
Take heed, O man!  for as each atom falls,
So wastes thy little spark of life away.

O turn, my soul!  from worldly vices fly,
And follow Innocence where-e'er she strays;
See with what ease an honest man can die,
None but the wicked wish for length of days.
