Begone, ye base intruding cares!  away
Ye empty bubbles of the busy crew!
Let calm reflection spread her purer ray,
And contemplation brighten every view.

Let vivid fancy with her piercing eye
Pursue the objects fading on the sight,
While silent evening, thro' the azure sky,
Prepares the slow-advancing shades of night.

See where they come &mdash; From yonder western hill
The setting sun emits his parting beam,
While from the east the dewy vapours chill,
Eager embrace the visionary gleam.

A solemn aspect shadows o'er the plain,
The verdant mountains gloomily arise,
The rocky cliffs that dignify the scene,
In darksome grandeur mingle with the skies.

The winding Forth, whose commerce spreads her sail,
Fades unperceiv'd; its islands disappear;
No more the barges skiff before the gale,
With pleasure's voyage the easy heart to cheer.

EDINA'S sons pursue their various joys,
Love, lust, debauch'ry, pleasure, science, trade;
The restless streets emit a lulling noise,
The ancient turrets glimmer thro' the shade.

But chief around that ever-sacred dome,
Where Scotia's monarch 'wont to rule sublime,
The genius of the evening loves to roam,
And view the ravages of ruthless time.

Thro' every corner of the gloomy hills,
Where ancient splendor rais'd her trophy'd head,
Thro' yonder chapel's desolated walls,
The lonely mansions of the godlike dead,

She strays alone, and scatters from her store,
Heart-throbbing terror o'er the sacred place;
Bids Scotia's sons the awful scene deplore,
And save the ruins of the royal race.

For oft the roving youth, with scornful sneer,
(Unequall'd insult!) tosses round the bones;
Oft violates the honours of the bier,
And throws a stain on Scotia's dauntless sons.

Where now I sit, around this lonely pile,
The Genius of Destruction points her course,
And greatly boasting in her vanquish'd spoil,
Records the actions of her savage force.

"Here once (she says) the virgin band repair'd,
Whom health, and beauty grac'd with all their charms;
Here once the sacred rites these heroes shar'd,
Whose souls could love, or bear the toils of arms.

"Here sapient sages once unrivall'd shone,
Here raptur'd poets pour'd the feeling note;
But now these heroes, virgins, bards are gone,
Their names, their honours, and their deeds forgot.

"Buried in dust, amidst the spoil of years,
Nought shall recall them from oblivion's tomb,
While ev'ry blast this mould'ring fabric tears,
That tottering waits my all-subduing doom."

How true her words! &mdash; But will no generous hand
With friendly aid prevent the threaten'd fall,
Bid the old ruins of the structure stand,
With taste supply, with judgment prop the wall?

Tho' small the pile, the objects scatter'd round,
By peaceful nature's bounty favour'd high,
The plain, the mount, the rock, with ivy bound,
All claim importance in the Muse's eye.

Tho' highly finish'd, may the hand of art,
With cautious conduct, and refinement's skill,
Superior graces to the scene impart,
And spread the woodlands o'er the adjoining hill.

The breezy arbours shade the splendid dome,
Where modern luxury exalts her head,
Where riot's children undelighted roam,
And vain ambition's giddy vot'ries tread.

And shall no shrub adorn this fairer scene,
Where contemplation might erect her shrine,
Where boundless fancy might complete her reign,
And lead the fav'rite children of the nine?

Where far retir'd amid the shading grove,
The pensive sage might feel the sacred fire;
The spotless breast confess the power of love,
And lust, appall'd, restrain each wild desire?

The flower of beauty, with applauding smile,
Edina's daughters!  shall behold the deed;
The heart-felt throb repay the trifling toil,
And every muse bestow some grateful meed.

But see the moon, from yonder eastern cloud,
Rolls on sublime, the regent of the night,
I'll cease the strain, and, in reflective mood,
Review the lonely objects of delight.
