Mother of human virtues, hail!
Whose soft'ning hand, and accent meek,
Compare woe's lamentable wail,
And wipe the tears from sorrow's cheek,
Blest emanation of the mind supreme!
Beneath whose mellowing beam
The virtues with the graces wove,
Expand and ripen into love:
Each passion soften'd, every wish refin'd,
Breathes gratitude to heav'n, and good to human-kind.

Oft bending from thy seat supreme,
With aspect mild, and pitying eye,
Serene in mercy's hallow'd beam,
Thou deign'st, in tender sympathy,
From the bright pomp of thine exalted sphere,
Woe's suppliant voice to bear.
Meek Charity!  thy awful pow'r
The warbling seraphim adore,
While grasping all below, and all above,
They pour their flaming souls in ecstacy and love.

From climes celestial, where thy realm
In boundless golden prospect lies,
To thee thy sire resign'd the helm
Of all beneath the vaulted skies;
That, while thro' life's conflicting billows borne,
Blind, indigent, forlorn,
The wretched sons of sorrow toil,
Thy lenient hand, and healing smile,
Might to the wand'ring point the destin'd way,
And thro' affliction's night transfuse a pitying ray.

Soft is the balm-distilling sky,
When Zephyr wakes the vernal year,
When beauty greets the enraptur'd eye,
And melody the ravish'd ear.
Thine, soft-ey'd cherub!  thine the happier morn,
Of love and pity born;
Beneath whose gently tempering ray,
Grief's sullen waters shrink away,
The cherish'd nerve supports the load of toil,
And heav'n-descended Peace, and dove-ey'd Patience smile.

Favour'd of heav'n, ye godlike few,
The highest, happiest of your kind,
In whom high Jove delights to view
The semblance of his boundless mind;
How great your bliss, while all beneath your eyes
In happy union lies?
When sorrow's agonizing smart
Lies fest'ring in a brother's heart,
How do your breasts with grateful ardour glow
To Him that gives your souls to share a brother's woe!

Bright as the genial orb that chears
The verdant earth with gladd'ning rays,
In Rome's imperial line appears
A sov'reign crown'd with living bays:
Now, rais'd amid the richest spoils of war,
He rules the trophied car;
Now, pond'ring in his godlike mind,
The various lot of human-kind,
Tho' rich the feast, and loud th' applauding lay,
Sits pensively sedate, and sighs to lose a day.

O ye, for whom the lib'ral hand
Of plenty spreads the genial feast;
Whose temples, bound in pleasure's band,
The golden smiles of joy invest;
With pain, remorse, and pining anguish torn,
Secluded from the light of day,
And reft of Hope's serener ray;
While Conscience, frowning o'er their fall'n estate,
With ten-fold horror cloaths th' impending hour of fate.

Nor these alone your griefs demand;
Ev'n Virtue's self is doom'd to bleed;
And oft Adversity's rough hand
Lies heaviest on her drooping head.
What woes unnumber'd prey on man's estate!
The frowns of angry fate,
Relentless, tend his natal hour,
Their feeble victim to devour,
And from the sickly dawn of orient light,
To shroud his infant head in shades of endless night.

Their ruin'd state how many mourn,
Fall'n from the tow'ring heights of fame,
A prey to infamy and scorn,
Chill penury, reproach and shame!
Will Friendship's source no soft'ning balm impart
To ease the bleeding heart?
Is Pity's genial current froze?
O thou that spurn'st another's woes,
Explore thyself:  Forgive, and be forgiven;
'Tis Virtue's sacred love, the sov'reign will of heaven.
