Ye maidens modest!  on whose sullen brows
Hath weaning chastity her wrinkles cull'd,
Who constant labour o'er consumptive oil
At midnight knell, to wash sleep's nightly balm
From closing eye-lips, with the grateful drops
Of TEA'S blest juices; lift th' obsequious lays
That come not with Parnassian honours crown'd
To dwell in murmur o'er your sleepy sense,
But fresh from ORIENT blown to chace far off
Your LETHARGY, that dormant NEEDLES rous'd
May pierce the waving MANTUA'S silken folds:
For many a dame, in chamber sadly pent,
Hath this reviving limpid call'd to life;
And well it did, to mitigate the frowns
Of anger reddening on Lucindas' brow
With flash malignant, that had harbour'd there,
If she at masquerade, or play, or ball,
Appear'd not in her newest best attire,
But VENUS, goddess of th' eternal smile,
Knowing that stormy brows but ill become
Fair patterns of her beauty, hath ordain'd
Celestial Tea.  A fountain that can cure
The ills of passion, and can free the FAIR
From frowns and sighs, by disappointment earn'd.

To her, ye fair, in admiration bow!
Whether at blushing morn, or dewy eve;
Her smoaking cordials greet your fragrant board,
With Sushong, Congo, or coarse Bohea crown'd.
At midnight skies, ye MANTUA-MAKERS, hail
The sacred offering! &mdash; For the haughty Belles
No longer can upbraid your lingering hands;
With train upborn aloft by dusty gales
That sweep the ball-room &mdash; swift they glide along,
And, with their falling streamers, catch the eye
Of some ADONIS, mark'd to love a prey,
Whose bosom ne'er had panted with a sigh,
But for the silken draperies that inclose
Graces which nature has by art conceal'd.

Mark well the fair!  observe their modest eye,
With all the innocence of beauty blest.
Could slander o'er that tongue its power retain
Whose breath is music?  Ah, fallacious thought!
The surface is Ambrosia's mingled sweets;
But all below is death.  At Tea-board met,
Attend their prattling tongues &mdash; they scoff &mdash; they rail
Unbounded; but their darts chiefly aim'd
At some gay FAIR, whose beauties far eclipse
Her dim beholders: &mdash; who with haggard eyes
Would blight those charms where raptures long have dwelt
In extacy delighted and sufficed.

In vain, hath BEAUTY, with her varied robe,
Bestow'd her glowing blushes o'er her cheeks,
And call'd attendant glances to her aid,
To blend the scarlet and the lilly fair.
In vain did Venus in her fav'rite mould
Adapt the slender form to Cupid's choice;
When slander comes, her blasts too fatal prove;
Pale are those cheeks where youth and beauty glow'd,
Where smiles, where freshness, and where roses grew:
Ghastly and wan their GORGON picture comes
With every fury grinning from the locks
Of frightful monster &mdash; ENVY'S hissing tongue,
With deepest vengeance wounds, and every wound
With deeper canker, deeper poison teems.

O GOLD!  thy luring lustre first prevail'd
On MAN to tempt the fretful winds and waves,
And hunt new fancies.  Still thy glaring form
Bids commerce thrive, and o'er the Indian waves
O'er-stemming danger draw the lab'ring keel
From CHINA'S coast, to Britain's colder clime.
Fraught with the fruits and herbage of their vales;
In them whatever vegetable springs,
How loathsome and corrupted, triumphs here,
The bane of life, of health the sure decay;
Yet, yet we follow, and extol the draught,
Tho' nervous ails should spring, and vap'rish qualms
Our senses and our appetites destroy.

Look round, ye sipplers of the poison'd cup
From foreign plant distilled!  no more repine
That NATURE, sparing of her sacred sweets,
Hath doom'd you in a wilderness to dwell,
While round Britannia's streams she kindly rears
Green SAGE and WILD THYME, &mdash; These were sure decreed
As plants of BRITAIN to regale her sons
With native moisture, more refreshing sweet,
And more profuse of health and vigor's balm,
Than all the stems that INDIA can boast.
