Happy the wight, who, free from all the cares
Of busy life, with sweet contentment blest,
Enjoys a lonely garret's cool retreat.
The rattling coach, and envious bustling croud,
Whom harder fate compels to trudge along,
Disturb him not, nor ever discompose
His peace, and calm serenity of mind.
What tho' no gilded mirror's ample range,
Reflecting all his wants, salutes his view
At entering, nor the costly Parian stone,
With polish'd gloss, adorns his humble hearth,
Which seldom brightens with the genial blaze?
What tho' he boast no gobelin tapestry,
Nor gorgeous arras hangings, but is forc'd
To form an anti-chamber with a wall
Of wretched canvas, full of horrid chasms?
What tho' the wintry storm, in all its rage,
Beats on his roof with howling blast, and makes
His tottering mansion quake thro' every beam?
What tho', returning homeward late at eve,
Fatigu'd with all the labours of the day,
Sighing for sweet repose, he be inforc'd,
'Ere he attain his nest's aerial height,
Up the ascent of sixty tedious steps,
Arrang'd in scalar, or in spiral form,
To drag his stiffen'd, spent, and restive limbs?
Yet, in his cloudy tabernacle shrin'd
(Like godlike Socrates in hamper hung),
He sees the busy world, beneath his feet,
Rustling incessant:  he himself mean-while,
From the vain ways of erring mortal men
Sequester'd, views them all:  nor recks whate'er,
Cit, beau, or bunter in pav'd street beside.

O who will set me on the yielding floor,
Shelt'ring my head beneath the nodding roof
Of some waste garret twenty story high!
To garrets oft, if we may credit fame,
The tuneful nine have whilome made resort;
In garrets still their frequent voice is heard,
On garret-walls their rarest strains are chalk'd;
And when from earth, retreating late, they soar
Up to their native sky, and leave mankind
In slumberous stupidity immers'd,
To lofty garrets last they'll bid adieu.

Who love not garrets, be he doom'd to dwell
Deep sunk below the level of the ground,
In some capacious cell, far from the paths
Of the bright sun and circling year remov'd!
While to the garret-swain, the signs of heav'n,
And all its wonders stand confess'd to view.
He first, with joyful gratulation, hails
The dawning day, and last of all enjoys
Its parting rays, from that exalted post,
Where, perch'd sublime, he roosts among the stars.
