Thro' golden fields, and gardens gay,
Whose sweets luxurious ope to view;
Rich Ceres and Pomona stray,
And lib'rally their blessings strew.
O'er all the mead of yellow dye,
Where-e'er you cast your circling eye,
Lo!  Plenty chears the happy swains,
And Nature all looks glad, while jolly Autumn reigns!

The blithsome hind with joy surveys
Rich Harvest bow his golden head;
And o'er the field contented sees,
His toil and labour well repaid:
Beholds the grain his smiling care
Had sown, which Spring made erst appear,
And thro' the Summer blooming grew
Now swell'd to full perfection rushing on his view.

No fears alarm his guiltless soul:
From far he unappall'd descries
The lightning glare &mdash; hears thunders roll
That with convulsions rend the skies:
Heard wheeling from the mountains hoar,
Rude tempests thro' the forest roar;
While o'er the boundless floating plain
The heav'ns rush down in torrents of impetuous rain.

Within his lone sequester'd cot,
Which deep umbrageous shades embow'r,
He shelter finds, till storms without
Subside, and thunders cease to roar:
And soon's bright Sol with beaming rays,
Thro' clouds bursts forth, and round displays
The beauties of the ripen'd year,
With joy to reap the fields, his rural throng prepare.

Now to the mead one step let's bend,
Sweet nymph!  pride of my rural lay!
Come yonder eminence ascend!
And taste the sweets of dawning day:
There lovely MIRA!  view below,
The fields with busy labour glow;
See ev'ry nymph and chearful swain,
While rural jokes divert, cut down the floating plain.

Behold!  how blithe the buxom maids
Labour, the lusty sheaves to pile!
While ev'ry swain his sweetheart aids,
And mitigates her rural toil.
How happy they!  so vice unknown,
Content has mark'd them for her own:
With them blest Virtue ever dwells,
And Innocence and Health imparadise their cells.

Not all the riches of the great
Can purchase happiness like theirs;
Nor all the downy beds of fate
Dispel in sleep corroding cares.
Say then, my Love!  whose virgin breast
Of ev'ry virtue is possest;
Say, wouldst thou leave my happy grove
To flaunt in gold!  forbid it, Heav'n!  forbid it, Love!

Leave pride and folly to the gay;
To yonder florid orchard haste;
Goddess Pomona leads the way,
And courts thee to a rich repast,
With sweets replete, th' ambrosial pear
And juicy peach hang round my fair!
The wall-fruit luscious please the sight,
And, mellow all, to taste their ripen'd sweets invite.

Behold!  where hangs the clust'ring vine!
The merry fauns exulting sing,
And hail with joy the god of wine,
While hills and dales with Ios ring.
The harvest o'er, &mdash; the village swains
Triumphant gambol o'er the plains,
Give all the day to mirth and play,
Prepar'd for dismal Winter's stern despotic sway.

Hark! &mdash; from afar the echoing horn
Reverb'rates shrill thro' winding vales;
The hounds now wake the purple morn,
And urge their prey o'er hills and dales:
In vain the stay, his foes to shun,
Would mix the heard; they selfish run
Far from their friend, in tears bedew'd,
And see him fall a victim to the merc'less croud.

So the poor nymph, whom love sincere
(Unskill'd in Cupid's mazy wiles)
Persuades to lend a list'ning ear
To Damon's tale, nor fears his guiles!
When by the cruel youth deceiv'd,
Her wonted quiet's ne'er retriev'd,
Her company acquaintance shun,
And by the swain she's scorn'd by whom she was undone.

Learn hence, my fair!  in bloom of youth,
To prize blest innocence!  your guide;
Mistake not flatt'ring praise for truth,
Nor in your charms too much confide;
For soon the bloom your cheeks disclose
Must die, and all their crimson lose;
And, like these groves, whose leaves decay'd
Now strew the ground, your charms in life's decline must fade.
