'Tis somewhat dark; the clouds around me roll,&mdash;
Dim night obscures my solitary view;
For shades and darkness blacken all the pole,
And tinge the landscape with a dusky hue.

Now silence reigns:  my meditations soar
Above the trifles of a transient scene;
That I these dreary mansions may explore,
Where sleep the dead, close by this hallow'd Fane.

All, all is husht, &mdash; save that the warbling Ale,
Which ceaseless babbles by that lonely hill,
Condoles in murmurs with my piteous tale,
And soothes my sorrows with its purling rill.

How many here have reach'd their long, long homes!
And bid the world and all its joys farewel:
Who mould'ring in those dark and silent tombs,
With coffins, shrouds, and darkness ever dwell.

Some dy'd in early youth, sprightly and gay,
But sullen now; no more their beauties glow:
They've left the precincts of the chearful day,
And death, grim death hath laid them very low.

Their dark-brown ringlets now no longer flow,
And wave neglected in the breezy gale;
No more the dimpled cheek and youthful glow,
But all life's former beauties now look pale!

What art thou, beauty? &mdash; This deep dismal gloom,
Where darkness, midnight darkness, ever reigns,
Spoils all thy rose-buds, sullies every bloom,
And tho' thou'rt wond'rous fair, thy blossoms stains.

Thy former lovers disregard thy charms&mdash;
Soon as they heard death's melancholy knell,
Did they not shun thy cold and lifeless arms,
Tho' once before thy shrine they prostrate fell?

Strength too lies here.  Upon the peasant's face
Imbrown'd and hardy with meridian toil,
Youthful and gay with every manly grace,
The lazy worms unscar'd &mdash; in volumes roll!

For death, that mighty hunter, bent his bow,
Whose arrows bath'd in blood ne'er fly in vain,
Unbrac'd their brawny sinews, laid them low,
While widows &mdash; sisters &mdash; mourn'd along the plain.

O, think on this!  ye careless, and ye gay!
I knew a swain in youth's most lovely bloom,
(Trust not in strength nor beauty &mdash; these decay)
Who fell a prey to death's relentless doom.

"One morn I miss'd him on the custom'd hill,
Along the heath and near his fav'rite tree,
Another came; nor yet beside the rill
Nor up the lawn, nor at the wood was he."

Thrice happy now, his troubles are no more,
Peaceful his rest; in endless safety HE
Lies in the haven of yonder blissful shore,
While we are toss'd amidst a roaring sea.

Here too old age oppress'd with cares and woe
Within earth's hospitable bosom's laid;
No more its brimful eyes with tears o'erflow
For ever silent in this lowly bed.

There lie the rich, within a narrow grave,
Who once possessed large and fair domains,
There's no distinction here of proud or brave:
A common ruin blends their poor remains.

Will these no more from their damp beds arise,
But sleep for ever in this drear abode?
No; &mdash; The loud trump shall rend the vaulted skies,
And each appear before the throne of God.

Planets and stars shall in confusion roll;
In yonder clouds the Saviour shall appear;
A furious storm shall rage from pole to pole;
Thrice happy they who lov'd this Saviour dear.
