The sober ev'ning, mantled round with grey,
Stretches her curtain o'er the vacant plain;
The shepherd piping, measures home his way,
To lull his toils in somnolence again.

Forth flies the owlet from her mansion drear,
The village smoke in curling spires ascends;
Hush'd are the warblers on the dewy brier,
And not a cur the wooly breed defends.

Pensive around these trembling rocks I'll rove,
These rugged grots and fortresses pervade;
Here all the sweets of solitude I'll prove,
If Contemplation deigns the scene to aid.

From these lone turrets, struck by Time's decree,
Once both the envy, and the pride of kings,
The moral mind in serious truth may see
How short the date of sublunary things.

Tyrannic Time nor spares the stately hall,
Nor yet the trappings of the lordly-seat;
Crush'd by his sway, ev'n rocks themselves must fall,
And, as they moulder, nod ascent to Fate.

These sparkling orbs, and thou Hesperian star!
That wont'st to light the pilgrim to his cell,
'Ere long, abash'd, must leave thy splendid car,
And, tumbling, bid th' aetherial heights farewell.

The lowly mourner of this artless lay,
Unknown to cringe at Fortune's radiant shrine,
'Ere long will fall a lifeless mass of clay,
And round his head the noxious nettle twine.

No monumental busts his tomb adorn,
Or art of sculptor grace his humble grave,
One flow'ry turf, besprent with dew of morn,
Is all he wants, and all his pride shall have.

Full oft the parson's bestial tread the green,
Where sleeps in common ground, fair Virtue's child;
While, pompous, he in garnish'd style, I ween,
The man of morals dissolute and wild.

And yet nor 'vails it to the hallow'd dead,
Tho' 'neath the clod his mould'ring bones remain,
Or tho' an ermine robe o'erspreads his head,
Alike unknown to pleasure or to pain.

The grave, dread mansion!  ends terrestrial pride,
There lie the ignorant and courtly wise;
The monarch finds a beggar by his side,
And there are equal all beneath the skies.

Transporting thought!  ye lenient maxims, hail!
All hail, ye maxims Meditation gave!
Teach me to trudge obeisant thro this vale,
And ev'ry frown of treach'rous Fortune brave.

I'll seek Content who moves in humble sphere,
Link'd arm in arm with poverty she strays;
Chears, with her looks, the aching breast of Care,
And, smiling, smooths life's irksome thorny ways.

Then will it little 'vail what wants are mine,
Tho' no obsequious minion calls me Lord,
Tho' my repasts should lack delicious wine,
Or cates purvey'd from Luxury's rich hoard.

Do summer suns emit a fairer light,
For Fortune's pamper'd fav'rites, than for me?
Or do these sparkling orbs appear more bright,
Or fresher bloom the verdure of the tree?

As calm my peaceful moments glide along,
No empty dreams of greatness scar my rest,
For me the warblers pour as sweet a song,
As mild their music for to make me blest.

Beneath my wattled roof, remote and low,
If dame Content presides in peaceful state,
Adieu, ye cares!  that riches oft bestow!
Adieu!  ye dazzling fin'ry of the great!

Nor would I once forego my rural toil,
Exchange the pleasures health and labour give,
To share with Murray ev'ry legal broil,
Or greater still by princely favour live.

All humble let me pass my destin'd days,
Alike to flatt'ry or to fame unknown;
The only boon I ask is Virtue's rays,
And what Morality can call her own.

One friend sincere to chear my narrow cell,
And Oh!  may Heav'n indulgent hear my pray'r!
One friend with Solitude and me to dwell,
And homely viands from my bounty share.

With him midst shade or valley would I rove,
Unnoted watch the radiance of the morn,
Mark Nature's progress thro' my artless grove,
And catch a theme for joy in ev'ry thorn.

Remov'd from all the noise and strife of town,
Stranger to ev'ry vice in Folly's train,
I'd count my innocence a spotless crown,
Wove with the social friendship of the plain.

Welcome ye scenes!  for Contemplation form'd,
Ye scenes where Folly ne'er erects her brow!
Avaunt ye fools!  by Dissipation warm'd,
Ye lawless sons of Revelry, adieu!

Enough the Muse! &mdash; and hark!  from yonder tree,
Lone Philomela mourns in plaintive lay;
Sweet bird!  melodious are thy notes to me,
But guide to lead the 'wilder'd on their way.

Behind yon tufted ashlings of the vale,
The waxing moon descends the western sky,
Along the river curls a chilly gale,
And echoing vaults to midnight ghosts reply.

A death-like silence spreads along the lawn,
I'll snatch my mantle, wet with pearly dew,
Court lenient slumbers till the morning's dawn,
And bid these time-struck battlements adieu!
