Foes to mirth and social ease,
Cold disdain with look severe,
Sullen pride that scorns to please,
Hate and envy come not here;
Suspicion fearful what to say,
Wary meanness, hence away!
Nor let the foul unhallow'd fiend of guile
His viper train conceal in ambush of a smile.

Sublime amidst the various feast
Courteous Porcia sits serene,
Thus the moon in glory drest
'Mid the lesser stars is seen;
She, mindful of a stranger's heart,
Her bounty deals with gentlest art,
And in her blythe and bright'ning smiles array'd,
The wine seems half alive, the very walls are glad.

Heed not now the wint'ry swell
Of torrents deep'ning on the ear;
Where plenty, peace, and pleasure dwell,
Summer reigns throughout the year.
Trim the tapers, raise the song,
Lead the mazy dance along,
Let ruffian winter on the windows beat,
Full crown'd the goblet stands his fury to defeat.

Eugenio, good Eugenio, why
Is that half opening smile suppress'd?
And whence the strange mysterious sigh
That struggles in thy lab'ring breast?
Another too!  ah!  now I know
For whom thy sighs of pity flow;
Try, gentle Porcia, try thy soothing art,
The wretched many share Eugenio's bleeding heart.

Wide and broad this vast world lies,
How fares it with its millions now?
Who cares or knows, the stoic cries,
And so cries sportive Florio too.
Kind Sylvia, let me turn to thee,
For by those tender drops I see
Thy gen'rous heart is not of stoic mold,
Nor leaves thine eyes the secrets of thy heart untold.

Keep far from me that chilly man
Who deems himself a sage refin'd,
That neither grief nor gladness can
The rigours of his breast unbind.
And, Florio, spare thy flatt'ring art,
The world is mistress of thy heart.
Let me not think it, for it cannot be,
The man to virtue cold will ne'er prove kind to me.

Spoke like a woman, Sylvia! &mdash; Now
Let sounds symphonious warble nigh,
And hark!  they come with trembling bow
To chear the heart and charm the eye
How well these varying tones agree
Emblem of what the soul should be
'Tis virtue's self that breathes
O sons of men, how long shall virtue [...] vain!

Musician, stay thy tuneful hand,
Superior excellence is near,
Diviner airs the soul expand,
And burn upon th' enraptur'd ear.
Eliza's golden rays impart
Th' elysium of her matchless heart,
All-musically sweet, her life's a song,
And where Eliza goes, the graces go along.

Porcia, gentle Porcia, why
This cruel haste to be alone?
All hearts are glad whilst thou art nigh,
The walls will mourn when thou art gone;
The wine, the wit, the music too,
Borrow half their charms from you&mdash;
She goes with inspiration in her train,
Yet promises in smiles to visit us again.
