No sumptuous marble this sad spot bestows,
No consecrated turf can here be seen:
What sweeter fragrance needs the scented rose,
Or brighter verdure, what the purest green?

Pleas'd have I, in the contemplative hour,
Approach'd with serious, solemn, sober tread,
Stopp'd at each grave, and ask'd each weeping flow'r,
The undistinguish'd merits of the dead.

The drops of dew which each fair mourner bore,
To list'ning Fancy want of words supply'd,
And the dim veil which Night's grave matron wore,
Just shew'd that Death had spread his ruin wide.

Here the despised sons of Virtue rest;
Come, Envy!  and, as for thyself afraid,
Turn pale; and beating thy malignant breast,
Swoon at the gen'ral wreck that Time has made.

How peaceful are their slumbers!  Not one breath
Is heard in conflict with the midnight air:
Just so their lives; and in the hour of death&mdash;
A happy scene of confidence and pray'r.

Worth, in Life's drama, often sighs in vain,
And unrecorded drops into the grave;
But free from censure, and without a stain,
Looks nobly down upon the vicious slave.

I ask no splendid signs of feigned woe,
No bending statues weeping o'er my urn;
Let some dear friend's more real sorrows flow,
And a lov'd country at my exit mourn.

In Mem'ry's page, exulting, I survey
A brighter life than ever struck my eye,
Where dreadful pomp and quaint devices gay
Proclaim the place where kings and statesmen lie.

For which more great, or which more happy, say,
A hero, in the front of battle slain?
Or he whom Peace conducted on his way,
Nor guarded with her olive branch in vain?

O blest Humility!  true godlike pride!
Still may'st thou meet with this protecting friend;
And whilst mad myriads with mad mirth deride,
May Peace still guide thee to thy latter end!

Hence, vile Hypocrisy!  that speckled form
Which none but poor degen'rate souls assume;
Those daubings, which the face of Truth deform,
And shade, all loathsome, her celestial bloom!

Truth asks no aid, but from herself to save;
Known is her pow'r, and to herself is known;
She plucks the seeking vot'ry from the grave,
And crowns him with a chaplet of her own.

Humbly depending, ONCE, the downcast eye,
The modest garb, th' example sure to move,
Drew signs of rev'rence, and rebuk'd reply,
For ev'ry heart was won and kept by Love.

Thomson in manners artless, friendship just,
Mild was thy temper, and thy virtue bold;
Tho' thou art blended with the common dust,
Thou ne'er wast fashion'd in a common mould.

Thee, Fothergill, to thee this verse I raise,
Bright champion of the best and brightest cause!
Tho' now alas!  insensible to praise,
Thy flock still grants its shepherd due applause.

Here many a worthy sleeps; and many a tear,
Not flowing from a weak or selfish thought,
Still shews, that virtue is to virtue dear,
The dead still teaching, and the living taught.

The bad &mdash; for such there were &mdash; and Candour bleeds
That she to such can only pity give;
But for the good, she glories in their deeds,
Which shall for ages in her mem'ry live.
