The mountain's wither'd brow look'd wan,
Chill flew the blast the braes between,
Swift o'er the lake the eddies ran,
And loud and harsh roll'd on the stream.

Dim swept the show'r alongst the vale,
The misty vale of verdure bare;
And low and mournful, in the gale,
Grief's heavy accents load the air.

The day had dawn'd, the morning past,
That sacred day to Christians dear;
The morning bell had toll'd, and fast
The hour of public praise drew near,

When by a tomb two swains did meet,
And thus sad Nicholas began;
Wild were his looks, down Colin's cheek
The dews of heart-felt sorrow ran.

NICHOLAS.
What do I see!  what sad event
Hath chang'd the swains of Ettrick now?
The native air of sweet content
Is fled, and grief broods on each brow.

From home, a weary length of way,
I've trode to day, in hopes to find
Some comfort, or some sweet allay
Of horrors which oppress my mind.

But no one heeds me:  all intent
On grief, relate some dismal tale;
Else o'er a grave or monument
Hang solitary, and bewail.

Of what disaster dire they've learn'd,
Declare, dear shepherd, if you know;
Of Nature's exit, tho' forwarn'd,
What lamentations more could flow?

COLIN.
Oh!  Nicholas, their grief is real;
No feign'd affected tears you see;
Nor is't vain they thus bewail;
But what, dear swain, hath happen'd thee?

NICHOLAS.
That will I tell you, tho' you scorn
My weakness, as indeed you may;
'Twill ease a mind quite overborne
By presages of great dismay.

Last night, when sunk in deep repose,
My guardian angel did unveil
Such scenes &mdash; and to my soul disclos'd
What mortal tongue can ne'er reveal.

Upbraid me not &mdash; if life and breath
Remain &mdash; ere Sol hath Libra gain'd&mdash;
I'm not more certain of my death,
Than seeing these my dreams explain'd.

Acknowledge, hast thou never yet,
When acting scenes in nature o'er,
An inward recollection met
Of having view'd the same before?

Nor is it strange:  Futurity
Though wrapt in mist, to human ken
Seem shapeless; yet a spirit's eye
Some giant features may discern.

And in the wild and dreary waste;
The village fair, or noisy lawn,
Wherever smiles the human face,
There spirits skim their airy round.

A guardian friend, his fav'rite charge
May thus of hid events apprize,
By great outlines, unfurl'd at large
In sleep, to Fancy's lidless eyes.

The sun had drop'd beyond the hill,
The welkin topaz blaz'd and died;
The wat'ry moon began to climb,
With aspect cold, the cieling wide.

Our frugal meal, our home, our health,
With gratitude our hearts inspire
To him who gives us all our wealth;
Him thank'd, to rest we all retire.

Scarce had the downy balm of sleep
Begun to press my weary eyes,
When howling wilds, and caverns deep,
In vision strange began to rise.

Me thought a long long journey prest;
Fond I set out, with prospects gay;
But want, and woes, and fears increas'd
Ere I had wander'd half my way.

A dismal lake before my sight
Arose, to which fair paths led on;
Where oft I saw the headlong wight
Sink, utt'ring many a piteous moan.

Thrice, by delusive sweets betray'd,
Into those faithless roads I ran;
As oft, by more than mortal aid,
Escap'd, all spent with toil and pain.

Grown cautious now &mdash; while slow and faint
I wander'd on, by fear compell'd
To gaze around:  What tongue can paint
The horrors which I then beheld?

O'er caves of death, and dens of woe,
On rocks the blasted forests hung;
The owlet and the raven too,
To dancing satyrs doleful sung.

Near to that awful lake I drew,
Thro' which a passage ne'er was found;
Black vapours, hugging billows blue,
In deepst shades the prospect drown'd.

Alongst its shores, both high and steep,
Millions of mortals thoughtless play'd;
Fast, fast they dropt into the deep,
Yet still the throng no fear betray'd.

All bent on trifles, ill enjoy'd
When once in the pursuer's pow'r;
And millions nothing else employ'd
Than pushing others headlong o'er.

By wither'd roots what objects hung!
Eager the summit to regain:&mdash;
Mad hope! &mdash; they sprawl'd, and grasp'd and clung,
Till efforts broke the thread in twain.

Infantile screams, and groans, and cries,
Now mix'd on ev'ry side arose;
Trembling I turn'd, and try'd to fly,
But precipices rude oppose.

Now, on my soul a beam of joy
Began to dawn, with placid smile,
As thou hast seen the orient dye
Triumph o'er night in fair April.

A swain I saw, whose children fair,
Like beauteous plants, around him sprung;
For him I heard the fervent pray'r,
For him the wish of ev'ry tongue.

Pale Misery and haggard Want,
Evanish'd quite before his eye;
I saw a thousand bosoms pant
With gratitude for each supply.

No shade of ostentatious glare
O'er one of all his actions ran;
No mortal e'er more justly bare
That noblest name, the FRIEND OF MAN.

Firm were his roots, his branches fair,
No gust his folli'ge e'er could shake;
When, lo!  a whirlwind in the air
Arose, and plung'd him in the lake.

"Great God!" I cry'd, and starting woke,
All bath'd and palsy'd ev'ry limb,
"Great God!  Great God!" nought else I spake,
Till certain what state I was in.

The clock now struck the hour eleven,
Mild sleep had shaded ev'ry eye;
The watchful pallid queen of heaven
Into my cot began to pry;

While I, all sick, revolving lay
On what this vision strange could mean,
Till near the dawning of the day
I doz'd again, and thus did dream:

I thought that low, on Yarrow fair,
I stray'd 'mong flow'rs of ev'ry hue;
The birds flew warbling thro' the air,
The trees all green with folliage grew.

I heard a groan, and soon perceiv'd
The ground all crimson'd where I stood;
The swans, that late in silver div'd,
Now moan'd, and swam in waves of blood.

I wak'd &mdash; but what I then did feel,
Omniscient King!  thou knowest best;
Had ev'ry thing I saw been real,
Not deeper had they been imprest.

COLIN.
What aerial whisper this convey'd,
Thou know'st, who study'st natures laws;
But all these scenes thy fancy ey'd,
Unweari'd Time hath brought to pass.

Of human life, thy bloated view,
Did previously thy mind prepare
To HIM submissively to bow
Whose hand the shafts of fate do bear.

We've lost a friend &mdash; that tender friend,
That rais'd us both when press'd so low;
For him thou heard the sigh ascend,
And saw the tear of sorrow flow.

On Yarrow's banks, while sound and whole,
Crush'd by a dreadful stroke he lay,
And yielded up the sweetest soul
E'er animated mould of clay.

Yon sun, that grimly thro' a cloud
Of snowy vapour seems to frown;
His daily circle hath not rode,
Since he to death's dark shades went down.

NICHOLAS.
And is it thus! &mdash; What deep distress
The partner of his breast must bear!
Do thou, kind Heav'n, his children bless,
Nor let the widow's heart despair.

But my dear BRYDEN, on thy tomb,
The rose of gratitude shall grow;
And o'er it, (when I pass alone)
Long long the tear of love shall flow.

Farewell, dear man!  thy spotless soul
In heav'nly raptures aye shall glow;
And from thy high congenial pale,
Smile at our silly toils below.

But holy vespers now begun,
Our swains with heavy steps retire;
Soon with loud peals the conclave rung,
While all to angels work aspire.
