Sweet child of light, with breezes ever mild
And fest'ring gleams, effulgent Summer, hail!
In showers and quick'ning warmth,
With ever-bright'ning hours
Pour'd from the regions of eternal day,
Thy genial influence shed, when nature rous'd
By Spring's enliv'ning call
Has felt the vital spark,
And from her wint'ry slumbers wak'd apace
With looks benign amidst a blooming world,
Whose tender opening buds
Await thy nursive ray.
Let love-inspiring May, thy sweetest nymph,
Her flow'ry bosom spread on hill and plain,
And cheer the bleaken'd waste
With nectar-breathing bloom,
Which Flora rear'd with Zephyr's balmy breath.
&mdash;Hush'd are the storms, and through the temper'd air
The gloomy north breathes mild.
Loud tempests heave no more
The troubled deep, nor sweep the cheerless skies
With chilling winds, beneath thy gentle reign,
Fresh verdure decks the trees,
The woods and herds, the lonely wilds look gay,
The mountains bleat, the blooming vallies low;
The groves melodious sing;
And every voice is joy.
From busy noise and earth's low tangling cares,
Oft let me steal where contemplation reigns,
Unto the Muses haunt,
Cool grove or murmuring stream,
There with slow step ascend each grassy steep,
And gaze on Nature in her fairest forms,
When dews at morn or eve
Pour health from ev'ry flow'r,
Nor her Majestic wildness let me shun,
The hoary cliff, the sounding cataract,
The mountain rough and wild
Whose summit strikes the clouds
And throws projective on the neigh'bring vale
A broad romantic shade; oft while the swain,
Chear'd by the mildest ray,
Sits in some western height
And sings his love-notes to the setting sun.
These are the peaceful scenes Contentment loves,
Which charm the pensive eye,
And fill the soul with awe.
Bright season!  whose all-piercing warmth enlivens
Dead nature's depth, and thaws the icy pole,
And on the smiling earth
Pours forth the lengthen'd day,
On fruit and flow'r shed thy prolific beams;
That they, through Autumn's sweet nurturing hand,
May yield a liberal boon
And nourish all that live.
Mankind awake &mdash; Creation sing aloud&mdash;
To Him, who spreads the universal feast,
And glorious Summer breathes,
With gratitude and love.
