Now Spring had rob'd the park in verdant green,
Where each gay fair in vying dress was seen.
On LYDIA'S cheek the rose of twenty-two,
In ripen'd pride, display'd its blooming hue;
When forc'd from town to lonely country shades,
'Midst swains whose breasts no pow'r of love invades;
Thus spoke the nymph the dictates of her mind,
(Rais'd on her arm, as in her bed reclin'd:)
"O youth!  enchanting season of delight!
When Beauty wears her charms unfading bright,
When the soft whispers of the essenc'd beau
The vanquish'd heart with pow'r resistless sue:
Then is the head-dress plac'd with artful care,
How oft her glass then views the changeful fair!
If Betty's rais'd complexion rather high,
Or pinn'd some knot of consequence awry,&mdash;
Yet ah!  what matter all these anxious cares,
In ev'ry curl to plant attractive snares,
With graceful ease to join the various dance,
To teach the eye to dart its 'luring glance,
Since to the glooms of solitude convey'd,
All art is useless, and each charm must fade.
No morning rap shall there the slumber break,
No rival's graces pale th' uncolour'd cheek!
In dull supineness slow the day will pass,
A lonely walk, or else a game at chess.
Thou Tea!  great cordial of a female's reign,
Within whose juice the sweets of scandal reign,
Shall bring, sad thought!  no news of ruin'd fame,
Or view some beauty perish o'er thy stream.
Like some fair flow'r that tow'ring springs on high,
But withers soon beneath a colder sky,
My bloom of youth in shades unseen will fade,
Till forc'd to live, O painful case!  a maid.
Then gay admirers will forget the charms
That in their breast awak'd Love's soft alarms.
The careless negligence, that slyly stole
With easy art upon th' unthinking soul,
Shall bid the eyes no more their transports show,
Th' attracted heart with beating terror glow."
&mdash;She said &mdash; while tears her streaming eyes o'erflow,
And farther thought add increase to her woe:
Sad as a fop to miss th' appointed hour,
Or railing prude surpriz'd in some amour.
