CANTO I.
As near as a silly old man can remember,
It was either the ninth or the tenth of December,
When each almanack show'd us in characters clear,
But three little weeks to the close of the year;
To the close of that year, when the Century too,
Call'd the Eighteenth by name, was to bid us adieu:
The weather was chill, and the garret was cold,
Where I sat by myself, hungry, peevish, and old:
I had pass'd in delights, which could ne'er come again,
Great part of that age which was now on the wane;
I had join'd in the weaving of garlands, to deck
That Hero immortal who died at QUEBEC;
And with still younger step had exultingly trodden,
When rebellion was quash'd on the plains of CULL0DEN:
I had heard, when a boy, of the reign of Queen ANNE,
When Fame, out of breath, after MARLBOROUGH ran,
And could scarcely come up with the wonderful man:
And my juvenile ear had with many a story,
Been amus'd of King WILLIAM, his prowess and glory;
Who to leave his own land by BRITANNIA was courted,
And Freedom's rich cargo, first hither imported;
And who, in pursuit of his noble design,
With the blood of the FRENCH dy'd the waves of the BOYNE.

All these recollections were fresh in my head,
When I shrunk, about ten, to my comfortless bed;
And instead of those slumbers, so wholesome and sound,
Which the temples of youth always hover around,
I spent many hours in that querulous strain,
Which so frequently haunts an old citizen's brain,
In comparing together (but not without sighing)
That century's exit, which now was a-dying,
With the close of the last, which, when equally near,
Yet burnt in its socket still steady and clear.

Then Peace, with its manifold blessings, were ours,
And Plenty refresh'd ev'ry field with her show'rs;
While with voices accordant, both old folks and young,
Fill'd with food, and with gladness, most cheerily sung:
Our soldiers were look'd on as so many HECTORS,
And ev'ry where mention'd as Freedom's protectors
Ev'n Louis himself, that ambitious old fellow,
Had lately been drubb'd, and for peace made to bellow;
And impatiently sitting his proud lofty seat on,
Turn'd instantly pale at the name of a BRITON.

But now what a contrast!  while War, that infernal,
Seems ordain'd to chastise us with scourges eternal,
With Want at his heels, that implacable pow'r,
And Famine, wide-stretching his jaws to devour;
While the poor of the people with taxes oppress'd,
With ignorance., labour, and hardship depress'd,
Can hardly procure, for as much as they strive,
Such a pittance of food, as will keep them alive;
Even those in a once more respectable line,
Are now ev'ry comfort compell'd to resign,
Are constrain'd to bewail the quick waste of their money,
And for prudence to substitute strict parsimony.
White such is the state of our comforts at home,
No better the prospect abroad when we roam:
The horizon of Politics will not, I fear,
Be found more inviting, more tranquil, or clear:
Instead of a Louis, afraid of our arms,
And kept by our glory in constant alarms,
We have now (how disgraceful!) a MUSCOVITE PRINCE,
Who, in spite of good faith, and good manners, and sense,
Has presum'd on our ships an embargo to lay,
Which prevents ev'ry soul of them getting away.
This crazy, capricious, &mdash; this Emperor King,
Whom a drubbing alone back to reason must bring,
Our ally to-day, and to-morrow our foe,
His immense debt to BRITAIN appears not to know;
He forgets how it was, when his ancestor PETER,
'Mong his bears and his boors, the first rational creature,
Came over to ENGLAND, to suck in some knowledge,
And attended at DEPTF0RD the nautical college,
Where he wrought like a Turk ev'ry day in the Docks,
And envy'd each vessel he saw on the Stocks;
These facts about PETER might serve to recal
To his senses and duty this insolent PAUL,
And teach him a propel respect for that Nation,
Where his ignorant ancestor learn'd navigation.

And yet is not this that identical Man,
Whom the Treasury Bard calls the great SOVERAN?
In whose idle praise prematurely was spent
Such a store of most beautiful paper and print?
(For it sure is a truth, which but few will gainsay,
That in these the chief charm of the poetry lay.)
But oh, what a shame!  that her sons should abuse,
In a talk so degrading, our national MUSE!
How fallen indeed is her fame in these days,
When she thus makes a despot the theme of her praise!
When a drama no more the has pow'r to bring forth,
But is forc'd to import them each one from the North;
From a land, in which Taste, that sweet elegant bride
Of Genius, was never suppos'd to reside;
From a land, in which lead is the case of each skull;
From a nation, in short, most proverbially dull!

How diff'rent the scene our PARNASSUS display'd,
At the close of that age we so lately survey'd!
How dark then with cypress our tragical bow'rs,
And the fragrance how rich of our lyrical flow'rs!
Our cedars how lofty, our myrtles how sweet,
And of nettles satiric, our branches how neat!
For DRYDEN, unparallell'd master of rhyme,
Was still in existence, that flourishing time,
And had not long before, in the happiest tone,
Of spirit and sweetness, made VIRGIL our own;
Since which he had also his Fables produc'd,
Which the rudeness of CHAUCER to polish reduc'd,
To the sweetest of rhyme, which turn'd BOCCACE'S prose;
And from OVID some tales, and MAEONIDES chose:
There too first appear'd that superlative song,
To which all the lyrical graces belong,
And which even no Critic has ventur'd to slander,
The wonderful Feast of the great ALEXANDER.
Nor had this poetical Prince of his age,
Very long discontinued to write for the stage;
By him from destruction SEBASTIAN sav'd,
In the Court of MOROCCO its tyrant had brav'd;
And meeting, when there, with his injur'd friend DORAX,
Had almost been thrust on the spot through the thorax.
But to SOUTHERNE, MELPOMENE chiefly apply'd,
Her house with funereal feasts to provide;
And that skilful purveyor produc'd in succession,
Two banquets, where sorrow surpasses expression:
ISABELLA, betray'd her first vows to forego,
And finding in madness a refuge from woe;
And Prince OROONOKO, reduc'd to a slave,
And seeking indignant relief in the grave.
Young ROWE, with his Stepmother, also that year
Had begun with eclat his dramatic career;
That career which presented, before it gave o'er,
Unrepenting CALISTA, and penitent SHORE;
That career which proceeded to such elevation,
Of elegant verse, and of sweet declamation.
One tragedy likewise by CONGREVE was giv'n,
In the year sixteen hundred and ninety and seven;
(I believe I am right, but if not, there's no matter,
Chronologic exactness my fancy would fetter),
Where a Princess, who wept like a stream through a meadow,
Was in one little day both a Bride and a Widow:
But CONGREVE'S chief excellence did not lie there,
For the sock was the dress he delighted to wear;
While his wonderful dialogue dazzled the Pit,
With keen coruscations, and flashes of wit,
And his Muse to disgrace each competitor hurl'd,
With his LOVE back FOR LOVE, and his WAY OF THE WORLD.
SIR JOHN VANBRUGH too was an able assistant,
And from true comic humour perhaps not to distant;
Whose RELAPSE show'd us virtue assail'd by temptation,
And whose WIFE from her spouse had immense provocation.
To write, before this, COLLEY CIBBER began,
And merrily taught us, that LOVE MAKES MAN;
A piece which gave earnest of something more great,
The JOURNEY TO LONDON, and NEGLIGENT MATE.
Captain FARQUHAR had also his talents display'd,
And the gay, gallant WILDAIR already pourtray'd;
Beginning that course, which produc'd, ere its close,
The brisk Serjeant KITE, and the Plot of the BEAUX.

Nor did they confine all their wit to the stage,
For this was besides a satirical age;
The DISPENSARY then ev'ry reader amus'd,
In which honest GARTH all his brethren abus'd,
Touch'd their medical squabbles with keen ridicule,
And made each solemn doctor to look like a fool.
Great PRIOR had likewise a humorous vein,
And in some of his tales almost rivall'd FONTAINE:
His lyrical merits most amply appear
In his secular song for the sev'n hundredth year;
And his amorous ditties muff add to his praise,
Where his court to his CLOE he skilfully pays;
Not to mention that tender and sweet tete-a-tete,
Which exhibited HENRY and EMMA'S debate;
Where the lovely Brunette has her constancy try'd,
And Suspicion himself is at length satisfy'd.
At the time that we speak of, was ADDISON too
Of the regions of ITALY taking a view;
Where, from classical studies his mind to relax,
He wrote his fine letter to Lord HALIFAX;
And, if TICKEL'S report our belief may give way to,
There put upon paper four acts of his CATO.

Nor did male-bards alone the poetic trade follow,
Our females too shar'd in the smiles of APOLLO:
APHRA BEHN, or ASTRAEA, was dead to be sure,
But her wit on the stage might be said to endure;
And THALIA again seem'd inclin'd to revive her,
In the comical scenes of SUSANNA CENTLIVRE.

A band, such as this, we now view with despair,
And in vain seek for heroes with them to compare;
What bards could we name (were we not to go higher),
For satire with GARTH, or for wit against PRIOR?
To whom shall THALIA that garland restore,
Which CONGREVE and CIBBER so worthily wore?
Or on whom shall her tragical Sister bestow
The wreath which the granted to SOUTHERNE and ROWE?
Of DRYDEN we speak not; &mdash; himself is an host,
Of rhyme and of reason superlative boast:
While at present how scant our poetical train,
And their verses how feeble, fantastic, and vain.
Thus long I had growl'd, not so loudly as deep,
Till at last I had growl'd myself fairly asleep.


CANTO II.
No sooner had sleep clos'd my windows of clay,
But the organs of fancy were open'd straightway,
And I saw, &mdash; not a spectre, with eyes sunk and hollow,
But the classical figure of PHOEBUS APOLLO:
His appearance was that of a charming young fellow,
Whose shoulders were cover'd with tresses of yellow;
And, in tender respect for his fugitive spouse,
The ever-green laurel encircled his brows;
His cheeks were two peaches, half-shaded with down,
And his eye was more prompt at a smile than a frown.

But on me, who had sinn'd beyond prospect of pardon,
By blaspheming the flow'rs in his favourite garden,
On me, whose offence was so dark in its hue,
A withering look of displeasure he threw;
While his voice, in a tone which I shudder'd to hear,
Thus thunder'd a peal of reproof in my ear:

Thou wretched old man!  with a soul of chagrin,
And whose heart is a compound of venom and spleen!
What title hast thou thus to pour out thy gall,
On the heads of my innocent votaries all?
But such is your state, ye frail children of clay,
Old age takes the whole of your senses away;
You have eyes, but you see not the beauties around,
And your ears are quite deaf to the sweetness of sound;
Your olfactory organs have lost all their pow'rs,
To distinguish the scent of poetical flow'rs;
Your feeling is blunted for that which is good,
And your Taste has no relish for delicate food.

With regard to your murmurs of general kind,
Your judgment perhaps may be equally blind;
Nor can I admit, that the time you have chosen,
For the theme of your praise, is the heft of a dozen;
For though peace had been settled at RYSWICK'S convention,
We were just on the eve of another contention,
When the frivolous war, for the SPANISH succession,
Led twelve years along in a bloody procession;
Whereas now, after eight, of such glory and toil,
We have surely some chance to see Peace in a while.
As for Plenty, I fear you are much farther wrong,
For your argument there is not worth an old song;
Though you can't recollect, you could scarce fail to hear,
What a famine was prevalent that very year,
The last of the Century you hold so dear.
Have you never been told of that maidenly pair,
Who continued to thrive, and to look fat and fair;
When hunger had wither'd each visage around,
And in whose kitchen-kettle strict scrutiny found,
A precious deposit of nourishing Snails,
Which they gather'd each dawn in the dew-sprinkled vales?
And that game, such as this, should be reckon'd delicious,
Is surely no proof of a season propitious.
I might add something more, perhaps equally true,
But with subjects like these I have nothing to do;
The principal cause why I deign'd to appear,
Was a wish your Poetical notions to dear,
And the hope to convince you, how far you are wrong,
In despising our living dispensers of Song.

Nor yet, on a scrutiny, will you be found
To have taken the safest of critical ground;
My surprise, I must own, would have been something less,
Had I seen you entrench'd on the reign of Queen BESS,
When SHAKSPEARE, the Sun of our fanciful sphere,
And SPENSER, our Moon so delightfully clear,
When with these, and with others that twinkled around,
Of lustre less brilliant, our system was crown'd,
Then your bulwarks it harder had been to invade:
And perhaps something more in your cause might be said,
If to rest with Queen ANNE you had even thought fit,
When POPE, SWIFT, and GAY, were the Trio of wit;
But from that narrow interval what couldst thou hope,
'Twixt the setting of MILTON, and rising of POPE?
That isthmus of taste, where old DRYDEN alone,
So carelessly sits on his mix'd metal throne?

But to stricter discussion I now will descend,
And examine your proofs from beginning to end;
And to ev'ry poetical garland assign'd,
I trust I shall always some parallel find;
Whence I doubt not to make it most fully appear,
That the garden of Fancy still flourishes here.

You began with Translation, and rested your claim
On the VIRGIL of DRYDEN, &mdash; a capital name;
But have you forgotten how much is now done,
From almost ev'ry dialect under the sun?
Still POTTER survives, who the Trio of Greek
Tragedians instructed good English to speak:


Old CUMBERLAND too, in translating the reliques
Of the GREEK Comic stage, is peculiarly Felix;
POLWHELE, not long ago, in an elegant vest,
Of home manufacture, THEOCRITUS dress'd;
While ANACREON, lately translated by MOORE,
Will probably longer than FAWKES'S endure:
You have PERSIUS also, by DRUMM0ND subdu'd;
And a charming LUCRETIAN sample by GOOD,
Before which your irregular DRYDEN'S essay
Upon these Roman Bards must with shame shrink away:
JOHN HOOLE is still living, to whom appertains
The chief importation of ITALY'S strains;
Of TASSO a passable picture he drew;
ARIOSTO came next; METASTASIO too;
While he did for them all quite the best he could do.
Nor yet are your triumphs in TUSCAN so scanty,
Since IRELAND can show finch a version of DANTE,
At least of his Hell, executed by BOYD,
As no other country has ever supply'd:
And to elegant ROSCOE the merit belongs,
Of turning so sweetly LORENZO'S sweet songs;
While his wish, that each mother her infant should pillow,
Introduc'd to our Matrons the name of TANSILLO:
You have also in mines Oriental who toil,
And smelt their ARABIAN Ore, like CARLYLE,
Till it issue pure gold, &mdash; or who richly and gaily
Can sport with their Fictions, like smart D'ISRAELI:
MAURICE too must be mention'd, that resolute man
In tracing the Fables of old HINDOSTAN;
Who contrives, though he can't Orientals peruse,
To give to his song ORIENTALISH hues.
Nor yet unexplor'd are the North's bleak domains,
As witness MATTHIAS'S RUNICAL strains;
As witness the EDDA'S mysterious Lore,
By COTTLE explain'd; &mdash; but his labours are o'er,
For Amos has reach'd the invisible shore.
But GERMANY now is the favourite field,
The soil most prolific fresh laurels to yield;
From the ghastly and horrible tale of LENORA,
How oft have your Bards condescended to borrow,
Since TAYLOR of NORWICH first let it afloat,
Till the last free attempt of juridical SCOTT?
But let all now give place; for lo!  SOTHEBY appears,
With his rich fairy music to ravish our ears;
Whose wonderful skill has made sweet OBERON,
That elegant Epic of WIELAND, your own;
And which, had you nothing besides to, take pride in,
Might rival alone all the versions of DRYDEN.
His PALAMON and ARCITE you did not quite mention,
Yet hinting at CHAUCER betray'd your intention;
The Tale of the Knight, much as you, I admire,
But remember, that DRYDEN is scarcely its Sire;
The story is all in old JEFFERY'S song,
And so to your cause it can never belong;
No farther at least than expression will go,
And the sweetness of rhymes, in such wonderful flow.
I will not indeed take upon me to say,
That any Heroical song of To-day,
Can compare on the whole with this wonderful lay;
Yet sure it is better to strike off a plan,
Than to work on the canvas of some other man,
And four or five Epics are greater than one.
While these things are so, I believe I may venture
The lists, in behalf of your Moderns, to enter.

That favourite spot of your old BRITISH story,
Which resounds with King ARTHUR, his feats and his glory;
That spot on which DRYDEN a structure projected,
And where BLACKMORE two ruinous fabrics erected,
Has at last tempted HOLE, on its surface to build,
And its nakedness now is completely conceal'd,
By a mansion, of which ev'ry room is enchanted,
And with Northern Magicians delightfully haunted.

In Latin long since, what by VIDA was sung,
And by KLOPSTOCK of late, with Hexameter tongue,
In blank verse by CUMBERLAND now is array'd,
Who on CALVARY'S Mount has so nobly display'd
That Victim eternal, at once God and man,
Whose blood for the sins of the penitent ran.

Some years now are past, since at once from the throng,
Young SOUTHEY stept forth with a narrative Song,
Compos'd, I must own, with much juvenile vigour,
And where JOAN of ARC was the principal figure:
I hope, (though this theme gives full proof of his vein)
That a better he'll chuse, when he chuses again;
Nor his time and his pow'rs, on the fruitless display
Of a subject so doubtful, again throw away;
Which both CHAPELAIN'S Lead, and the Wit of VOLTAIRE,
Had devoted to laughter beyond all repair

King ALFRED, too, lately has met with a Bard,
Who has thrown on his actions an Epic regard;
It is COTTLE, not he whom his EDDA made famous,
But JOSEPH of BRISTOL, the brother of Amos,
With a simple, yet pleasing expression, who sings
The hardships endur'd by this best of your Kings.

It should seem that this same is an Epical year,
Since two other Songs are about to appear:
Not one of them built upon outlandish dreams,
All the three are devoted to national themes;
For fanciful BURGES election has made
Of the splendid achievements of RICHARD'S Crusade,
Resolving the force of his talents to try on
That chivalrous Prince, with the heart of a lion:
And OGILVIE, he who presum'd to display,
The terrible scenes of the Last awful Day,
That Vet'ran in verse, who was Author of R0NA,
Means yet to contend far the Epic CORONA;
And for this noble purpose, a theme has selected,
On which POPE already an Epic projected;
That fabulous theme of invention the soil,
The arrival of BRUTUS in ALBION'S ISLE.

Nor must I forget (for perhaps he's your neighbour)
To praise the anonymous Author of GEBIR,
Which, in parts, (for as yet I have not seen the whole)
Discovers a truly poetical soul;
The story, indeed, seems ill-chosen and wild,
Fit only to pleasure some fanciful child;
But the style, though it swells to bombast at a time,
Has frequently flights beyond measure sublime.

But the Fables of DRYDEN some pieces contain,
Of a shorter, more wild, and more fanciful strain;
What reader but feels all his veins in a frost,
At the wonderful Tale of the Cavalier Ghost?
But that Tale stands alone, for I know not another,
Of a similar date, which could rank as its brother;
While the Muse of To-day, by the GERMANS instructed,
Through the wildest of scenes has her children conducted,
And produc'd sev'ral proofs of a marvellous dow'r,
In Fancy eccentric, and heart-freezing pow'r.

And, here SOUTHEY too makes a capital figure,
And simplicity joins with abundance of vigour;
While he tells (though in verse not to Pathos a-kin)
The fate of poor MARY, the Maid of the Inn:
DONICA is his and beyond all compare,
The marvellous Story of false RUDIGER,
With the Swan-govern'd Bark, down the river that floated,
And the Cavern that yawn'd to receive the devoted.

There is COLERIDGE, whose flights no restriction can fetter,
Who has peopled the whole of his Old Navigator,
With extravagant shapes, both of Horror and Fear,
But for what end collected, is not quite so clear:
His too are perhaps those eccentric designs,
Where whimsical Fancy with Ridicule joins;
Like the comfortless state of bewitch'd HARRY GILL,
When with ten waistcoats cover'd, his teeth chatter'd still.

Here the Sire of the MONK richly merits a place,
That work which abounds with such horrible grace;
In which, besides Prose, such effusions are seen,
As the lay of ALONZO and fair IMOGENE,
Where the Skeleton Knight scares the whole bridal rout,
With those eyes where the worms both crept in and crept out;
But I hear he has lately committed a blunder,
Giving so little new in his New Tales of Wonder.

There is one Minstrel more, that must here find a station,
And he is a SCOT both by name and by nation;
Whose wonderful Ballad, the EVE of St. JOHN,
In the true style of Terror, perhaps yields to none;
Where the ghostly Gallant, his fair Lady's white flesh on,
With one fiery touch leaves a sable impression.

With regard to the Feast of the Great ALEXANDER,
Which you justly observe bids defiance to Slander,
On this chapter alone (if it must be confess'd),
I am somewhat afraid to come off second-best;
That Lyrical Sun, whose unparallell'd ray,
Outshines all the splendors of COLLINS and GRAY,
Needs to fear no eclipse from the Bards of To-day.
And yet you have some, who can waken the Lyre,
And sweep o'er its chords with a finger of fire;
Your Laureat himself, though by no means supreme,
Does at times not amiss, on so hackney'd a theme,
Though far from the strains of his great Predecessor,
Who may never, perhaps; find an equal successor.

But SARGENT with greater respect we must mention,
As far from deficient in Lyric invention,
Of which ample proof both his Odes may be reckon'd,
On MARY of SCOTLAND, and CHARLES the Second.

SAYERS too has some very sublime Choral lays,
In the Lyrical part of his Northerly Plays;
Those in Rhyme are the best; for I can't much admire
Any Blank-verse effusion that's meant for the Lyre;
Nor must we forget his sweet Ode on a Fly,
Which with any Poetical Tid-bit may vie.

GEORGE DYER too here, that benevolent spirit,
A station deserves, for his Ode-writing merit,
As a sample whereof, on which no one can trade ill,
You may take his ASTERIA rocking the cradle.

And tho' last, not the least, lo, where BOWLES now appears!
While his Lyrical Bark to that region he steers,
Where HOPE soothes his sorrow with views Allegoric,
And SPENSER revives in his fancy so Doric.


CANTO III.
With DRYDEN thus far I have had to contend,
But I fancy that contest is now at an end,
For I scarcely suppose, that on him you design
To rest as your prop in the Tragical line.
SOUTHERNE then is the man, since you cannot well go
Down so far as the principal Pieces of ROWE;
For NIC at the Century's last closing year
Had only begun his Dramatic career;
So strong is the Pathos that still appertains
To the Father of ISABEL'S tragical strains;
I to him, till of late, must have bent in despair,
And could nothing have found with his scenes to compare.

Though JEPHS0N, his JULIA besides, and BRAGANZA,
Had tragediz'd also the Fight of ALMANZA,
It would not have done, &mdash; nor could I have collated,
With such compositions, the Regent of GREATHEAD.
Thy Dramas themselves, oh BRISTOLIAN HANNAH,
Though so rich in Religion's celestial Manna,
Where DAVID the Shepherd, and DANIEL the Seer,
With MOSES in Bulrushes hidden, appear,
Could scarce have supply'd my necessities here;
Nor could even to dig in that fanciful Mine,
By SARGENT discover'd, quite suit my design;
Or with SAYERS to mount to VALHALLA'S abodes,
And petition with FREA his RUNICAL Gods;
With CARRIL the CELT, for his MOINA to mourn,
Or with STARNO to weep o'er his child's early urn;
Nor sufficient those scenes, though so diff'rent in hue,
Though so strictly to Nature's simplicity true,
Where HURDIS pourtrays what all hearts must deplore,
The fall and the firmness of SIR THOMAS MORE.

All these put together, perhaps might be vain,
But triumphs still greater than these yet remain;
Another approaches to dazzle the scene,
It is BAILLIE herself, &mdash; 'tis your Tragical Queen;
It is she who intends, in her mighty careers
To visit each orb of the passionate sphere,
And from each to import such a portion of fire,
As may both of the Drama's departments inspire;
Who her prowess already has ventur'd to prove,
On the opposite passions of Hatred and Love;
Her BASIL, that noble, high-spirited Fellow,
May almost contend with the martial OTHELLO;
Who, betray'd by his love from strict honour to stray,
Indignant at once from the world bursts away.
Much too of that horror which reigns in MACBETH,
At the still solemn sound of the footsteps of death,
Must be felt in the view of that picture sublime,
Which presents stern DE MONFORT, his rage, and his crime;
While his sister appears, that unparallell'd form,
Like the Planet of Peace, in the midst of a storm.
With what zeal do I wish, that each subsequent year
May behold her advance in this noble career!
But should the feel languid before she has done,
And despair through the whole of her circle to run,
Let her then to inferiors THALIA resign,
And worship alone at MELPOMENE'S shrine.

Nor was this last advice an effect of the notion,
That THALIA now less stands in need of devotion;
I must own (or infringe on veracity's laws),
That this is another weak part of my cause;
With the gay scenes which CONGREVE was wont to supply,
Not to mention the rest of the comical fry,
I fear you at present have nothing to vie.
Had he who presented the College of SCANDAL,
Continued to wear of THALIA the sandal,
Nor thrown both his time and his talents away
On the vain, unavailing debates of the day;
Had he stuck to the stage, and not turn'd Politician,
How flourishing now might have been her condition!

That veteran Bard, whose extensive career
Brought at first a delightful WEST INDIAN here,
In the same Comic course has persisted with spirit,
And produc'd many pieces of unequal merit;
Nor has much time elaps'd, since this grey-headed Wit,
With his nice WHEEL or FORTUNE enrptur'd the pit;
And perhaps even yet he has something in store,
Before his TERENTIAN labours give o'er.

The Son of a Dramatst there shall be reckon'd,
Or to state it more plainly, GEORGE COLMAN the second;
His Father's full pow'rs though he does not inherit,
Yet his Pieces are seldom deficient in spirit;
To him both the Musical Dramas we owe,
Of barbarous INKLE, and poor YARICO,
And that in which KEMBLE so nobly appears,
The QUIXOTE-born Play of the Wild MOUNTAINEERS.

The absence of HOLCROFT THALIA deplores,
By Politics banish'd to GERMANY'S shores
Who has oft made you laugh, against critical rule;
By whom was proud ARROGANCE first sent to SCHOOL,
And whose GOLDFINCH, in phrase of eccentric construction,
Such gaiety strew'd o'er the ROAD TO DESTRUCTION.

There is one MORTON, also, our notice must partake,
Who delighted the folks, when he gave them the HEARTACHE;
And perhaps sits exulting, at this present Now,
That the fates sped so well his theatrical PLOUGH.

REYNOLDS too has a right to his share of renown,
Whose whimsical Farces, of bulk overgrown,
With laughter so oft split the fides of the Town;
With his gay spouting DRAMATIST made a deposit,
And bursting at once from the small China closet;
And lately a popular picture he drew,
Which the whole of LIFE brought in one ev'ning to view;
However absurd they may look on the page,
By dint of good action, they please on the Stage.

With such Females to cope, as old BEHN and CENTLIVER,
You do not want now Lady-writers so clever;
Madam COWLEY, for instance, whose dexterous BELLE
Found her lunatic STRATAGEM answer so well;
And whose humorous touch the PENDRAGONS design'd,
By Fashion from Rustics so quickly refin'd.

And INCHBALD is yours, who in manner prevailing,
So pleasantly prov'd, that Each One had his Failing,
And to her for a still later gift make your bows,
While even the four ANTI-GERMAN allows,
The pow'rful attraction of sweet LOVERS Vows;
For which, and the STRANGER, of still deeper hue,
Our thanks must be paid to the great KOTZEBUE;
And where, I beseech you, can be the disgrace,
In importing of Dramas so lovely a brace,
From a land where, of dullness though once the domain,
Now Fancy, and Pathos, and Sentiment reign?

Let all the gay Trophies we thus have survey'd,
Be now put together; then let them be weigh'd
In the opposite scale with your old Comic feast,
Which if they outweigh not, they'll balance at least.

From Comedy's Hall is an easy transition,
To the Closet of Satire, and GARTH the Physician;
For on him, and the Medical Squib which he penn'd,
Your cause in this quarter seems all to depend;
Whilst I, for one single unseconded thing,
A number of capital pieces can bring.

It is true, that the interval now is so long,
Since the BLUNDERHEADS figur'd in ANSTEY'S gay Song,
Since the pleasures of BATH with such spirit he sung,
And the numbers so merrily danc'd on his tongue,
Since which he has ventur'd no second display,
That he scarcely belongs to the Corps of To-day.

But have you not him, who (perhaps on a Monday),
Long ago gave a treat of his nice SALMAGUNDI,
And who lately, on tome other day of the week,
Serv'd up TOPSY-TURVY, with BUBBLE AND SQUEAK?

And have you not PINDAR, that wonderful PETER,
Unparallell'd master of ludicrous metre;
From whose fanciful brain, inexhaustibly strong,
Such torrents have gush'd of Satirical Song?
Whether he, as at first, your Academy enters,
And offers his jeering advice to the Painters;
Or with Ridicule's caustic attempts to reduce
The egotist tumours of BOZZY and BRUCE;
Or, by boiling proof taught, with SIR JOSEPH BANKS sees,
How wide the distinction 'twixt Lobsters and Fleas;
Or by means of the slender Machine of a Louse,
With murmurs and rage fills a certain Great house,
Or presages MACARTNEY'S disgrace and disaster,
At the Court of great CHINA'S imperial Master;
Or, beyond all the rest, with unparallell'd glee,
The royal Visitors gives us to see,
In their progress so sage through WHITBREAD'S Brewery.

You said, and I mean not to prove you a liar,
That FONTAINE in his Tales, was not much above PRIOR;
But PETER'S the man, who in arch, comic vein,
And dryness of humour, surpasses FONTAINE;
Nor with so rare a talent his eulogy ends,
But through all composition's wide circle extends.
How rich is that exquisite grace which belongs
To his tender effusions, and amorous songs!
How few are those strains which in Pathos surpass
His mournful lament for the death of his Ass!
What Ode of its size so much fancy displays,
As that which the GLOW-WORM so sweetly pourtrays!
Or who but a dull and insensible Vandal,
Admires not the lofty address to his Candle?
I deem, that since SHAKSPEARE you have not possess'd
Such a Bard, by the whole of the Muses caress'd;
A writer like PINDAR, whose versatile wit,
Such opposite subjects can equally fit,
And who clothes in the same easy mantle of Rhyme,
Both the lowest of Fun and the highest sublime:
But these talents, alas upon themes of a day,
Too often by far have been quite thrown away.
Awake thou great Spirit, and cave meaner things,
With such perishing objects as Painters and Kings;
Learn at last, for the sake of true Poetry's cause,
To despise present profit, and present applause;
Let Int'rest no more, with its grovelling force,
Be the Pole-star that guides thy poetical course;
But before Age arrive to extinguish thy fire,
Let some noble subject resound from thy Lyre;
Nor foolishly trust, for thy whole reputation,
To structures thus built on a sandy foundation,
Which will soon stand in need of complete Annotation.

GIFFORD, too, has his praise, to whose valour we owe,
The defeat of that silly, but dangerous foe
Of a pure simple Taste, that absurd affectation,
Which so late overrun more than half of the nation;
His attacks put to flight all that Band DELLA CRUSCAN,
Who had hither imported their Fooleries TUSCAN,
And whose thin silken doublets but ill could sustain
His BAVIAN hailstones and MAEVIAN rain.
You must take notice too, that the pow'rs of his mind,
Are no more than WOLCOT'S to Satire confin'd;
In complete proof of which, see his VIOLET-TUFT,
And his Dirge upon ANNA, with tenderness stuff'd.
Alas that two Bards of such Pathos and glee,
Two Spirits congenial, should thus disagree!
Should thus to the public their quarrels expose,
And furnish such triumph and mirth to their foes!
But embrace now, my Sons, and henceforth let your strife,
Be only who most can exhilarate life;
Since the Public apart ye so long have delighted,
How much might be done by your pow'rs, when united!

Let me now turn to view that anonymous Band,
Who send forth their arrows at Party's command,
And of course who derive the best tones of their Lyre,
From Political, not from Poetical fire;
Such is he, who descanting on Learning's PURSUITS,
His darts, tipp'd with poison, malignantly shoots
At the flow'r of her Sons, and, secure in his Mask,
Perseveres undismay'd in his infamous task;
While an elegant flight makes amends, at a time,
For many a dull page of prosaical Rhyme.

Such were those, who, their country from ruin to save,
Their wholesome monitions so prudently gave,
Who each week made a practice to treat like a fool
Some eminent Bard of the JACOBIN School,
And constantly fill'd their Poetical station
With some laughable strain of Burlesque Imitation.
Benevolent DYER, thou also hast tried,
This ill natur'd Steed of the Muses to ride;
But thy heart in this point to thy head prov'd a traitor&mdash;
Thou art far too humane for a writer of Satire.

But to GARTH'S comic Song, e'er I leave it behind,
I perhaps might a still closer parallel find,
In a work, I mutt own, not of yesterday's date,
And therefore I fear scarcely lawful to state;
In which HAYLEY the TRIUMPHS OF TEMPER display'd,
And the crosses endur'd by SERENA, sweet Maid;
Where in Cantos alternate, no space intervenes
Betwixt every-day-manners and fanciful scenes;
Where the former are touch'd with sufficient success,
While his skill in the latter is sensibly less.

And indeed, for one DRYDEN, so sweet and sublime,
You have now a whole legion of Masters of Rhyme;
And some of them too, of pretensions so rare,
As with DRYDEN himself might presume to compare.

What lay you to DARWIN, the DERBY Physician?
Who so long for the Muse hid his predisposition,
Till he broke forth at once in explosion volcanic,
And dazzled all eyes with his GARDEN BOTANIC;
Where each amorous plant with such tenderness glows,
And each line in a stream of such harmony flows,
That the samples of Rhyme, which appear from his shop,
In smoothness and gloss beat the numbers of POPE;
But I grieve that a work of such costly erection,
Should want so completely the grace of connection,
And that Plumes which display such a splendor of feather,
Should have no proper Ribbon to keep them together.

Nor in Rhyme has this Prince of your Versificators,
Been deficient in forming some good imitators;
Of these is JOHN GISB0RNE, the splendid achiever
Of a picture presenting the Valleys of WEVER;
Where gorgeous Metaphors sparkle and shine,
Perhaps too profusely, through each little line:
And WORDSWORTH, too, merits a similar praise,
Who the beauties of SWITZERLAND richly pourtrays,
And lights up each scene with unqualified blaze.

What Critic of Taste could not scribble a sheet on
The praise of that old ABORIGINAL BRITON,
Whose haunts and employments, whose figure and dress,
Were by RICHARDS pourtray'd with such brilliant success?
While his sullen retreat, with so manly a tongue,
And invincible passion for freedom he sung;
Contrasting these virtues of tumult and strife,
With the gentler graces of civiliz'd life;
But he who could utter so lofty a strain
At the very first trial he made of his vein,
Oh why, ever since, does he silent remain?

To the merit of ROGERS I cannot he blind,
Who Science Didactic with Pathos has join'd,
And told why the PLEASURES OF MEMORY please,
In a Song, which wants no other beauty but Ease;
For, however delighted, one tires of a style,
Whose Pomp is ne'er cheer'd by Simplicity's smile.

POLWHELE on a theme pretty nearly the same,
But in different measure, to favour lays claim;
Whose LOCAL ATTACHMENT, in old SPENSER'S dress,
Perhaps pleases more, though it dazzles us less.

The productions of some other Clerical Bards,
Are by no means unworthy to catch our regards;
Such for instance as CRABBE'S, who with elegance sung,
On the various themes of a Newspaper's tongue;
And BIDLAKE'S more recent, the snug humble cell
Of a good Rural Parson, who painted so well;
But these, though of merit, must now give place all,
To Works more important, for notice that call.

What Critic of praise but must find ample scope,
In that sweetest of Volumes, the PLEASURES OF HOPE?
Over which with delight Taste for ever could ramble,
With rapture pronouncing the sirname of CAMPBELL;
Of that wonderful youth, on whose earliest days
Kind Fortune has shed Popularity's rays,
And convey'd, without years of expectance so long,
At once to Fame's summit his elegant Song:
But BRITAIN at present no longer contains
This Painter of Hope, who on Germany's plains,
In Novelty's quest, felt an impulse to roam,
And left to regret his admirers at home.
But soon may kind Fate, from that far distant shore,
To his own native SCOTLAND again waft him o'er!
That with pow'rs still expanding (if possible this),
He may yet higher raise our poetical bliss.

Nor have I quite done; for this prolific Time
Can exhibit a still greater Phenix of Rhyme;
At the date which of late you so fondly survey'd,
No THOMSON as yet his appearance had made,
Nor the Seasons by him been so richly pourtray'd:
But now your Descriptive productions among,
You can boast of another original Song;
Where those Seasons again are call'd forth in review,
And display'd in a manner surprisingly new,
While the Plan, and the verse, and the general Tone,
Have been made by the Writer completely his own;
That Tone which affords us the purest delights,
And Force with Simplicity sweetly unites;
And all this has been done, letter'd pride to destroy,
By him who was once but a poor Farmer's Boy,
And of whom making shoes is the present employ;
All this too by one of true worth has been done,
An affectionate Husband, and dutiful Son;
By that BLOOMFIELD, whose fame on a column is rear'd,
That shall stand, both by Taste and by Virtue rever'd;
Such a Poet is something, (deny it who can?)
But 'tis something much more, to be found such a Man.


CANTO IV.
I have hitherto strove (and I hope with success)
To prove that this Age has of Genius not less
Than the one you prefer; and, though sometimes confin'd,
I trust I have never been far left behind;
But of this long contention, in what yet remains,
I believe I shall triumph in still louder strains,
As I see in my coffers of treasure a Bank,
While in yours I perceive little more than a Blank.

However complete, both in language and thought,
Was the letter from Italy ADDISON wrote,
I scarcely suppose, that you ever could really
Prefer it to all the Epistles of HAYLEY,
Which that Bard has at various times been inditing,
On History, Painting, and Epical writing.

But though this might suffice, I am not so content,
But will push my advantage to greater extent;
There exists of Epistles a sort not so common,
For which we are debtors to OVID the ROMAN;
A sort which was wholly unknown to the GREEKS,
Where it is not cool reason, but Passion that speaks;
And in some eager moment of feelings ecstatic,
Gives vent to a Monologue, almost Dramatic:
Of this, at the period you had in your eye,
Your Muse, I am sure, could no model supply;
For POPE had not then started up, to surprise a
Whole world with the tones of his sad ELOISA;
Of her, who though long and though widely renown'd,
LADY GRANGE no unworthy successor has found;
That high-minded Fair, who on KILDA'S bleak shore,
In concert laments with the loud Ocean's roar,
And to banishment hopeless, and solitude hurl'd,
Indignantly spurns at the laws of the world;
The sad bitter consequence destin'd to prove,
Of paternal oppression, and criminal love.

You did not, I think, mention ELEONORA,
That Dirge in which DRYDEN expresses his sorrow,
For the death of a woman he never had seen,
In accents not very pathetic I ween.
Such then was your best Elegiacal lay,
And the half of this Century glided away,
Before that poetical era, when GRAY
Gave each former Elegy-wright a contusion,
With the striking effect of his Church-yard effusion;
Yet even this pensive, lugubrious lay,
Is surpass'd, as some think, by a song of To-day,
Where BOWLES with such charming simplicity, dwells
On the Hectic resorters to BRISTOL HOTWELLS,
With such sweetness bewails their unfortunate doom,
And weeps o'er his RUSSEL laid low in the tomb.

Neither DRYDEN, not those of his season, employ
The Sonnet, that pretty poetical Toy,
Which answers so well for compression in Rhyme,
Of one single thought, either sad or sublime;
But now, what a change!  in the last twenty years,
How ample the list of your sweet Sonnetteers!
Among whom CHARLOTTE SMITH far the foremost appears:
For who will deny her just claim to that place,
For her simple, pathetic, and elegant grace?
How sweet her address to the Silver Bow's Queen,
And her wish soon to rest in that fanciful scene!
How moving her fears, as the sighs to survey
The dear little troop of her children at play!
And how touching her plaint, in those moments of gloom,
When the flow'rets of Fancy had lost their perfume,
And Hope, sick at heart, was reclin'd on the tomb!
What a strain that, where ADELINE painted with force,
How vain Nature's beauties to soothe her remorse!
And that, where GODOLPHIN his wretchedness told
To the deaf ear of night, and her elements cold!
How lively those colours of contrast, that glow
In ORLANDO'S sad sketch, while he roams through the snow,
Of the Peasant's sound sleep, and his own waking woe!
But above all the rest, how delightful the gloom,
Which her CELESTINE sheds o'er the Village-Maid's tomb!
While in words, which her own disappointment disclose,
She envies the Virgin her humble repose.

To rival a name now so widely endear'd,
A maiden Competitor lately appear'd;
And, resolving at least not in numbers to yield,
Of Sonnets a Century brought to the field;
But, SEWARD, believe me, &mdash; depend too upon it,
You have wholly mistaken the aim of a Sonnet,
And your pieces, with all their legitimate claims,
Come far short of CHARLOTTE'S more negligent frames;
Whatever the rules which they strictly fulfil,
They give not our bosoms that wonderful thrill,
They ne'er with such cadence of melody flow,
Nor deluge our souls with the fame pleasing woe:
You'll say, they're MILTONIC &mdash; the Model is coarse,
And for Sonnets you could not have chosen a worse;
Hence that stiffness of style, which all grace undermines,
And that Blank-verse confusion of different lines:
But I speak of the general tone of thy lays,
For a few of them merit unqualified praise;
Such is that, which man's fall, or by age or disease,
Compares to the leaves as they drop from the trees,
And thy speech to the Door of our slumber eternal,
Which was soon to receive thy Protector paternal.

MARY ROBINSON also this room claims a seat in,
Whom her friends boldly christen'd, the SAPPHO of BRITAIN
And HELEN MARIA, hight WILLIAMS by name,
For her Sonnet to Hope, equal favour may claim:
Another, of late, in a Northerly land,
To grasp the same laurel has held forth her hand;
Nor held it in vain, &mdash; for that exquisite Lay,
Pointing "one place of rest" for the Tenants of clay,
In vain over which all the storms of life rave,
(For they ne'er can disturb the repose of the grave)
That Lay for its Author such honours may claim,
As with SMITH'S will associate BANNERMAN'S name.

Though your Females hold chiefly the Sonnetteer's pen,
Some good ones have also been written by Men;
Such is that, in which BOWLES paints, in no common strain,
The useful assemblage of Poverty's train;
And, did I not wish to be somewhat laconic,
I could mention some more, that are not unharmonic,
Though I grieve that his manner is rather MILTONIC:
Such also are those, where the vivid expression
Of SOUTHEY laments o'er the Trade of Oppression,
Holding up to abhorrence of AFRIC the wrongs,
And of barbarous EUROPE the blood-sprinkled thongs.

In point of simplicity, few can decide
Whose Sonnets are best, those of LAMB or of LLOYD;
While each CHARLES by turns sees his friend at his heels,
And the breath on his neck of that Rival-friend feels:
PARK too, in this walk, is an elegant name;
And BOOTHBY with justice our notice may claim,
While his Daughter PENELOPE'S infantine bier,
With Sonnets he strews, and each Sonnet a tear.

Any one of these Pieces, who would not rank higher
Than the whole of the amorous verses of PRIOR?
And to flow'rs gather'd fresh from so ample a field,
Even HENRY and EMMA the contest must yield.

At the time which your preference chose to produce,
Blank-verse had entirely gone into disuse,
Except on the Rage; and that language sublime,
Of Fancy's and Sentiment's loftiest clime,
Had been wholly dismiss'd for monotonous Rhyme.
Great MILTON in vain had his choice of it made,
And the whole wile extent of its music display'd;
For his work in neglect and obscurity lay,
And had not yet been touch'd by one critical ray.
With MILTON indeed then none can compare,
Yet of Blank-verse Professors you still have your share.

It is true, that great COWPER, the King of the band,
Has been lately remov'd from this sublunar land;
Whose wonderful TASK with a Sopha began,
And through such fields descriptive and moral which ran,
Touching almost each theme interesting to man:
And yet there are some, who still follow his ways,
And deserve to be mention'd with liberal praise;
Such, HURDIS, art thou; while to memory all,
Thy deceas'd Sister's merits thou seek'st to recal;
Or whether (what Pride deems a very low thing),
The poor VILLAGE CURATE thou chusest to sing:
And such is TOM GISBORNE, who makes, as he should,
Such poetical use of his WALKS in a Wood,
And objects there viewing, of all shapes and sizes,
One minute describes, and the next moralizes.

SOUTHEY also is one of your Blank-verse commanders,
Whose pow'rs serpentize in so many meanders;
And though some here maintain that his merits are small,
I must beg leave to differ from such Critics all;
What strain could so strongly take hold of the heart,
As the lines which his manifold feelings impart,
While the Man seeks in vain for himself in the mild
And innocent looks of the promising Child!
How novel that Hymn, and how tenderly great is,
To the Gods of the Hearth, to his darling PENATES!
And with what sad simplicity does he relate,
The progress of HANNAH'S unhusbanded fate!
I grant, that his measure not equally flows,
And at times is much farther from verse than from Prose;
But still I assert, that the worst of his strains
Most pow'rful effusions of feeling contains;
With whose striking force and original air,
Whole Volumes, though labour'd with scrupulous care,
Of polish'd inanity, will not compare.

To COLERIDGE, perhaps, those sweet Verses belong,
Which the sadness deny of the Nightingale's song,
And a father's heart paint with its feelings so strong.

Nor shalt thou, FAWCETT, want thy proportion of praise,
For daring to curse, in these blood-thirsty days,
The Furies that wait on the conqueror's car,
And the barbarous practice of CIVILIZ'D WAR.

LUKE BOOKER has chanted the HOP-GARDEN'S store,
That theme which by SMART had been treated before;
And BIDLAKE for his has selected the Ocean,
That grandest of objects, when put in commotion.

At the time you refer to, no SCOTIAN Bard
To sing in his own native language was heard;
For Indigence toiling, with sweat on his brow,
And Ignorance then, made that Nation to bow,
But the case, I believe, is quite different now;
And though She her Ploughman of AYRSHIRE has lost,
The gay Muse of SCOTLAND may still have her boast;
MACNEILL is the darling of that Rustic Queen,
whose talents for Poetry richly were seen
In his popular Story of WILL and his JEAN;
Not to mention its Sequel, the Sorrows of WAR,
Which some Critics think not so pleasing by far;
Besides which, to him the rare talent belongs,
Of constructing both tender and humorous Songs.

Your List was concluded with BEHN and CENTLIVRE,
But the first of these Dames was not then a surviver,
And of course could not jufsly on your side be reckon'd,
So your Female pretensions must rest on the second;
While to combat one single, uncompanied name,
I can raise a whole feminine Legion of Fame;
A select troop of these, to the number of Nine,
As the Muses of BRITAIN, peculiarly shine;
Of seven of which I've already made mention,
Though some of them merit still farther attention.

Enough has been said of the following four,
Of BAILLIE and ROBINSON, SMITH and Miss MORE;
For SEWARD, perhaps I ought backward to look
On the Dirge which embalm'd the adventurous COOKE,
And on that wreath of song, which the plac'd on the tomb
Of the brave Major ANDRE, lamenting his doom:
For WILLIAMS, my tongue might have brought into view
Her Song on the Conquest of wealthy PERU,
And that Lyrical piece, of no ev'ry-day pow'r,
Which her fancy suppos'd to be found in the Tow'r:
Of the seventh no notice as yet has been taken,
Whose name is now BARBAULD, though once it was AIKIN;
Many rich lays are hers; but the rest all above
Is the sweet Song the wrote on the Symptoms of Love:
An eighth is that RADCLIFFE, whose genius so strong,
In the train of Romance led such wonders along,
And who mingled her Prose with occasional lays,
Of fanciful matter and elegant phrase.

The list is completed by BANNERMAN'S name,
Who, besides that applause which her Sonnets may claim,
Has produc'd other pieces of greater duration,
And perhaps not the word is her Illumination;
Where a drain of such exquisite feeling bewails
The miseries often that Conquest entails
On the widow'd and orphan'd survivors of those,
Who in Glory's sad strife are cut down by their foes.

Though these are your Ladies most justly renown'd,
Yet a few other names might be easily found;
As the first of the list should be that MONTOLIEU,
Whose book has so recently started to view;
Whose Plants are enchanted, and who, in her lays,
Their language to well to her Reader conveys:
OPIE too is another that honours her sex,
Whose merit the meagre Anthology decks,
And its barren domain with her laurel protects:
MRS. WEST it is also my duty to mention,
Whose Pieces display a good deal of invention.
All these are Plebeians; but two noble names,
LADY MANNERS, and BURREL, have likewise their claims;
And, still higher to rise, you have DEVONSHIRE'S Dutchess,
Whose praise would require the most exquisite touches;
From things beyond rank who derives her renown,
And whom Beauty and Taste have united to crown;
While her pencil descriptive that region pourtrays,
Where Nature her ALPINE attractions displays,
And paints the bleak range of ST. GOTHARD'S domains,
And the "beauteous Horror" that ev'ry where reigns.

Those two that have wielded the comical pen,
Even INCHBALD and COWLEY, (to wave other ten)
Were sufficient to cope with CENTLIVRE and BEHN.

Old Growler, perhaps, by the pains I have taken,
You may now be convinc'd you was wholly mistaken;
And I henceforth advise you, at each future season,
To be more in the way of attending to reason;
No longer to flight such poetical treasure,
Or some tokens expect of severer displeasure.

All this when the Son of LATONA had said,
At once from my sight he a vanishing made:
I awoke quite converted, resolving to follow,
With all due submission, the hints of APOLLO,
With regard to the Works he had mark'd with his Fiat,
And for six months together to keep myself quiet,
And peruse ev'ry piece of poetic invention,
Which the King of the Lyre had thought proper to mention.
