Not thee, whom underneath AURELIA'S bed
The blue-ey'd Phyllis, or inferior Nell
Of humbler birth, hath plac'd &mdash; nor thee I sing
Of Asiatic mould &mdash; whose polish'd form
Denotes pre-eminence beyond the clay,
The baser produce of Worcestrian lands,
Beyond what Bow (where oft foot-foundred cit
Halts for refreshment) or that other vill
For buns and puffs full famous, Chelsea hight,
Can boast &mdash; where bower'd in the lovely shade
Of arboret, old Fungus lolls superb,
Self-satisfy'd, and quaffs, potation-fond,
His nectar pomeridian &mdash; or in a box,
Swelling with all the majesty of paunch,
Amidst a crowd, his rural pipe enjoys.
Nor thee, of coarser frame, in garret vile
Deposited (to whom the houshold nymph
Pays frequent complement, altho' despoil'd
Of manual handle) does the muse regard.
Far other looking-glass demands her song.
Hail, charming Mirror!  that reflectst the face
Of sweet CLEORA.  At thy splendid shrine
What countless legions of adorers bow!
Here beauty gazes, and her form surveys,
Transcendent, irresistible &mdash; nor fails
To ruminate how best she may ensnare
The dangling coxcomb in her fatal net.
For this (with no small share of female pride)
She dresses tasteful, practices the wink
Significant, the random glance oblique,
The pleasing smile, and not displeasing frown.
Here too Deformity in tawdry garb
Begins her patch-work.  Emulous of praise,
Each feature doth she deck with care minute,
And spies a charm that nature never gave.
Then beats her heart with more elastic force,
Around she rolls her large, projecting eyes,
Affecting love, and triumphs in the thought,
The glorious thought, of conquests yet to come.
Weak, simple woman! &mdash; Simpler still the man,
Whose ardent gaze such optics still allure.

Without the engine, what avails the dress
Of self-enamour'd fop, or what the curl
Natural, or adventitious!  for in vain
Courtoy may raise the sugar-loaf toupee,
If Brilliant can't the ornament discern.
Hail yet again!  thou spectacle of art!
Art's brightest lustre!  'fore whose polish'd plain
Thy poet, razor-arm'd, hath often shown
His chin crimiferous, where lives the man
Who does not own thy universal use?
The pompous lawyer, ravenous of fee,
Pulse-feeling doctor, and the grave divine,
In thee admire the dignity of wig.

But should some hideous crack thy shining face
Deform, tremendous to behold!  neglect
And sure contempt will be thy future fate.
So fares it with the nymph, whose precious gem
Of chastity is sullied.  Sour disdain,
And sharp invective, render'd sharper still
As utter'd by her sex, her ear confound,
Unus'd to tauntings &mdash; and the sneering beau
Rambles in quest of more accomplish'd charms.

CLEORA!  then &mdash; thou most resplendent star
In beauty's firmament!  exalted maid!
Damsel un-paragon'd!  whose well-turn'd limbs
Are far above the feeble reach of praise,
Beware &mdash; the caution of a friend observe,
And con this lesson from the looking glass.
So shall the bard repent not of his lay,
Well-pleas'd, if 'gainst the wiles of artful man
He can but guard one unsuspecting fair.
