Whilst musky winds the streaming canvas swell,
And fan the landskips purfled bosom dear;
Where young ey'd spring 'midst roses likes to dwell,
The youthful poet drops a pensive tear.

The tear of sorrow trickling down along,
Perhaps bedews the snowy lily's breast;
As to yon star he tunes his mournful song,
Falls silent o'er the purple vi'lets vest.

The humid radiance of the powder'd sky,
And worlds just twinkling to the straining sight;
On pinion'd thought would tempt the soul to fly,
And fill the mind with rapture and delight.

Full oft reclin'd near woodbine circled bow'rs,
I sought the incense that the muses brought;
Or gently lull'd away the mirth-infusing hours,
To court the luxury of tender thought.

But now no more the painted meads invite,
The vermeil garden nor the vocal choir;
No more yon lucid twinklings charm the sight,
Nor glows my beast with all its wonted fire.

Nor deem it impious to revere thy name,
Aetherial son of fancy's truest birth!
My infant use once long'd for such a fame,
That grateful breath'd from merit's lasting worth.

In sympathetic languishments the soul
In real woe its restless passion tells;
In every act it finds a sad controul,
And on its tiresome grief for ever dwells.

With folded arms along the silent grove,
The passive youth to pensive grief a prey;
Near to yon rivulets lonely moaning rove,
And grows impatient for declining day.

The morning comes; and care unmans the soul,
Whilst frantic sorrows mantle in my brain;
For tumults now in whirling eddies roll,
That far exceed the wild enthusiast's strain.

Ah!  what avails a youthful poet's name,
When blasphemy defiles the muses song!
For most unknown to merit's rising fame,
With curs'd deceit will represent it wrong.

Perhaps, mild youth, you misemploy your time,
Imbitter life, and starve the liberal soul;
With jingling nonsense cramp'd in gothic rhyme,
Whilst brainsick frenzy through thy pages roll.

Lean penury attends the flighty strain,
And ever waits on poets wretched life;
Then read no more; lay schemes of hoarded gain,
Or try the solace of a married life.

Go, hapless mourner, quit the silent grove,
Nor tune no more the cypress-weeping lyre;
No more o'er Hammond's wailings wond'ring rove,
Nor talk of rapture, and a Shakespear's fire.

Go seek diversions 'midst the bustling crowd,
Or try new scenes, still shifting to thy view;
Resound his lordship's praise with heat aloud;
Despise religion, and the saintish crew.

Let not ambition tempt thy tender muse
Then through the rugged paths of modern lore;
For squint-ey'd critics will thy lines refuse;
Perhaps befriended by thy friends no more.

Try Circe's arts; and sweet oblivion drink
To gloomy thought, or sad corroding care;
In pleasing frenzy see thy sorrows sink,
And now thy lighten'd soul will better fare.

Too weakly indolent to jilt the muse,
The soft enthusiast yields t' enticing song;
Who can thy sweetness, Thompson, once refuse,
That e'er to love's soft train did once belong?

Unhappiest sure of all unhappy men,
Ye finer souls who mellow into love
From the slight touches of a poet's pen,
And in your breast such sweetest pain approve.

Without the gift of fortune's partial hand,
What boots, my Laura, once for me to know,
That Maro liv'd in fair Italia's land,
Or Delia caus'd the muse-fir'd poets woe?

When August wander'd all our up-lands o'er,
Or lusty April mantled in her bloom,
Where rivers stray along in humid store,
How oft did we our ev'ry hour consume?

When Leo rode sole emperor of the sky,
And thirsty flowers of refreshment lack'd;
To still retreats together would we hie,
And kiss ideal fictions into fact.

The Medecean Venus have I seen,
In sportive daliance, amorous delay;
So lightly trip it o'er the verdant green,
Streaming all around her lambent day.

But now no more the devious poet strays,
With beauty to protract the silent hours;
O'er daisy'd meadows hymning vocal lays,
Nor to yon star his pleasing musings pours.

Passive he sinks beneath the weighty blow,
When sad oppression lifts her iron rod;
In tearful whispers does his sorrows flow,
In sad resources to his guardian God.

With Whitehead's muse thro' each voluptuous wild,
In sportive glee how often should I roam;
Or oft when Huckell's lyre the time beguil'd,
As fancy fir'd sing sweetly wailing home.

Though just Apollo gave the meed of worth,
To Isis bard that triumph'd o'er thy strain;
Yet Mason we allow thee of poetic birth,
Nor ere but once did court the muse in vain.

Oft o'er thy sweetest wailings did I roam,
And o'er Musaeus urn just drop a tear;
Or in thy Mevil bribery's sons bemoan,
And with my latest breath his name revere.

Nor shall my namesake too his song impart
Without a grateful sense of all his worth;
For melancholy's sweet son I know thou art,
The sky's thy home, and of aetherial birth.

He that can draw the soft pathetic tear
In pious drops from pity's modest eye;
To merit's sons must be for ever dear,
Nor can the muse her gratitude deny.

Learn this in Gray, sweet elegy's own son,
Whose tender sweetness melts the female heart;
Whilst soft'ning angels list'ning at the song,
Ask wond'ring who this secret did impart?

The spotless priest (when solemn tapers light
Play'd round the temple in a holy blaze)
In Clitherow's page still innocently white,
Stands all confess'd, at Frederick's death amaz'd.

By night's black pall, majestically slow,
Ah!  see the mourners quit the silent grave,
Whilst tristful sorrows from their breasts o'erflow,
That none, alas!  could Frederick's death ere save.

Oxonia boasts thee for her native son,
And still her Isis triumphs in thy verse;
Ingenious Wharton!  for thy attic tongue
Was tipt with nectar at thy genial birth.

Soar lyric Hawkins on thy eagle wing,
Soar to thy God and nest thyself in heav'n;
Nor further dare the muse attempt to sing,
T' elegy's sons such ardor's never giv'n.

Remain a proof to dullness grinning sons,
That poetry with reason's just pretence;
For manly reasoning to thy strain belongs,
Nor bless'd with genius art devoid of sense.

The men of prose, a plodding selfish race,
Despise the poet and the muses song,
And with the marks of infamy disgrace
The name once thought to angels to belong.

When then the dastard sons of envious care,
Shall damp the genial current of the soul,
Forgive the youth that does his case declare,
And points the men that poets do controul.

The man that cherish'd in the tender breast,
The genial seeds of scientific lore;
Was always for his labour doubly bless'd,
And though he gave, yet ne'er debased his store.

Then let not genius in the barren shade,
Unfoster'd sicken in the pensive gloom;
For breasts there are for heavenly musings made,
But curse the dapper witlings from your room.

Live long the champions of the muses song,
Lowth, Wharton, Mason, and my plaintive Gray;
May Albion's chalky cliffs long, very long,
Its tributary honours to you yearly pay.

And may the sea-girt shore with freedom crown'd
Still undisturb'd protect your soft repose;
The fairy elves shall thump the hallow'd ground
In honour of your fame, till Phoebus' rays arose.

For Spencer oft indulgent thinks of you,
And eyes thee here full oft with wishful eye;
The British Virgil pays obeysance due,
And thinks for to conduct thee to yon azure sky.

Some from the squeezings of a lovesick brain
Just tagg some grov'ling prose in jingling rhyme;
These harmless creatures bless the muddy strain,
Till a review slow traces every line.

Such earth-born souls I mean not to befriend,
But nurse the seeds of poets sacred rage;
The race of dunces sure will never end,
Then leave the criticks pleasing war to wage.

But you, Oxonia's sons, whom genius fires,
With sacred ardour for the muses song;
Nor deem it impious for to string your lyres,
Tho' wild enthusiasts represent it wrong.

May the short pray'r the youthful poet breaths,
Be always prov'd by Oxford's ev'ry son,
The muses always wear the peaceful wreaths
That smilingly to olive peace belong.

May classic learning flourish in thy reign
Great Pit, immortal on the dregs of time;
Nor fools, enthusiasts, hurt the muses strain,
With nonsense lavish'd against harmless rhyme.

The gaudy gloss of fortune's giddy band,
With wonder only strikes the vulgar eye;
But learning with good nature hand in hand,
Confers such honours that will never die.

Let learning then her sacred head up-rear,
And hurl her vengeance on the dastard foe;
The muses still the laurel chaplet wear,
And weave its honours on the poet's brow.

With freedom crown'd, such gifts thy fav'rites boast,
Fair Rhedecyna o'er thy verdant plain;
Accept my wish, though in a distant toast,
For heav'nly nectar does inspire the strain.

Rise Oxford, ancient in the length of days,
Thy sons preserve, thy liberty and laws;
Still shall the muses carol heav'nly lays,
And other Whartons shall defend my cause.
