BOOK I.
Where nodding woods that tuft the mossy rock,
Or rise majestic on the swelling mount,
With distant falls of water trickling down;
Where solemn oaks in stately grandeur rear
Their swelling heads; whilst through the waving copse
The peaceful breezes swell the throbbing breast,
To scorn the low-born reptiles of a world,
And court in leaf-strown walks from human eye,
Sweet meek-ey'd peace and fancy's tow'ring strain;
The museful poet often devious strays
To hear the widow'd black-bird tell her tale
In artless wailings to the list'ning scene,
Where lengthen'd vistoes oft th' abstracted eye
Of fancy charm; whilst through th' irriguous vale
Sweet green-rob'd spring her lavish beauties sheds,
Embosom'd soft 'midst waving woods around,
Or nodding groves that still embrown the scene.
Thy mart, oh Bewdley!  claims the poet's lay,
Where first (by gracious providence ordain'd)
He breath'd the vital air; and now he brings
A grateful tribute of respectful praise.
The tuneful page, the star-tip'd pillar'd dome,
The glitt'ring canvas, or the breathing paint,
The speaking statue, or the chisel'd stone,
The doric column, or the fretted vault,
The well-turn'd period, or pathetic strain;
The flute, soft-breathing to the lovers lay,
With blandish'd accents syllabled to love,
All are derived from industry and thee,
Sweet emanation of almighty pow'r;
Or what with lasting praise transmits our name
To ages yet unborn.  Deign smiling maid
With graceful ease to guide my youthful song,
As erst with thee the tapers dazling glare
I've watch'd, or oft submissive waited still,
And long'd the moment of returning thought.
The muse, unskill'd for sweet-lip'd flattery's strain,
To thee, Lorenzo, dedicates the lay;
In whom unite the social manly sense,
And all the soft embellishments of life.
Ye green-hair'd nymphs who smilingly attend
The solemn silence of the scene; ye rills
Still pratling through the mossy pebbles loud,
Or curling now by Zephyr's ruffling breeze,
In free meanders trickling down along,
To meet Sabrina's silver stream below.
Best meed of verse, oh hither wildly free,
Your soft loquatious harmony disclose
In melting murmurs to the tuneful song.
Now when th' autumnal sun the vary'd plain
With glory gilds, inspiring life around,
Extatic felt in every beating vein;
The gunner oft in short-liv'd thunder kills
The rural game; the keen-nos'd spaniel draws
With sense sagacious the informing gale;
The ranging pointer in his mid career,
Now cautious makes a pause; quick through the air
Their sudden flight the leaden death o'ertakes,
Resounding far; now from the mountain's top,
Born on the gales of dying winds, the horn
Long winding through th' ecchoing vale below
Is heard delightful; and the jocund crew
O'er hill and vale pursue the timid hare,
Whilst eccho sweetly mocks their joyful cries.
Aetherial son of fancy's truest birth,
O gentle Thompson!  whose descriptive vein
Draws reason captive; and whose flowing vein
O'er latest aera's deathless shall prevail!
May some remains of that poetic flame
That warm'd thy breast and fir'd thy ravish'd soul,
Descend on me, the muses meanest son;
Who fain would sing to Laura's list'ning ear
What native beauties her own Bewdley boasts.
If Avon's stream the poet could inspire
To sing her free meand'ring channels wide,
And live in memory's book in golden notes;
Shall sweet Sabrina's silver stream remain
By us unsung?  We boast the rural arts;
The clanging horn full oft awakes the maid
Soft sliding down in balmy rest, to tunes
More pleasant than the Spheres, more grateful far
Than generous happy draughts of rich champaign
To youthful poets when they grow immortal.

Now near the daisy-braided mead, beneath
Yon oaken foliage of luxurious growth,
The fisher oft, with various arts, essays
To tempt the silver fry.  The tortur'd worm
Now round the barbed steel in writhed forms,
Seen in the water's chrystal glass afar,
Draws to its snare the swift voracious trout
In speckled pride; upon the bank he dies.
The warrior perch with scaly coat of mail,
By nature cloath'd from all assaults, now yields
With sad reluctance to the bending rod.
The Eel in silver labyrinths involv'd,
And carp all burnish'd o'er with wavy gold,
Live, sweet Sabrina, in thy lambent stream,
And tempt the museful angler to delights
Beyond the reach of kings.  Here would the muse
The arts disclose of patient fishers, when
With treacherous bait he tempts the scaly fry.

How cautious!  near yon willow-fringed stream
He takes his silent stand:  but sweet Musaeus thou
Forbid'st the pains, since thy own muse he sung
Near Windsor's nodding groves in strains sublime,
The rural arts and anglers gentle toil.

Now smiling ev'ning crowns my devious walk
With all the blushing purple of the sky;
And grateful now the faintly-beaming sun,
In mild majestic dignity array'd,
Invites the laughing damsel to direct
Her lightsom footsteps where Sabrina rolls
Her naval stream:  where thousand shepherds play
In gladom gambols near her willow'd brim.
Or chuse you rather Ticknell's proud retreat,
Unhappy Arthur's seat:  (Ill fated prince!
Who like Marcellus promis'd in his reign,
A train of glories to a gazing world.)
O come!  whilst teeming nature swells the year,
There gently listen to the faithful tale
Of turtles cooing with incessant love.
I languish, die, with love!  whilst through the grove
Its silent arrows pierce into my soul,
Deep, deeper still!  O softest pleasing pain!
Nor can the virgin lilly, nor the roses breath,
The silver-footed dew, nor zephyr's spicy gale,
The snow-drop's whiteness, nor the primrose gay,
The billing turtle, or the cooing dove;
Nor yet my native skies all burnish'd o'er
With flaming gold, nor yon aetherial lark
That sprung low-roosted from her lowly bed,
Ere sooth my anxious mind &mdash; Come Laura then,
O come!  whilst joyful nature blooms around;
Whilst bonny belles each tender lover seek,
To crown their happy loves, my charmer, come,
And bless the garden of its sweets:  for thee
The damask'd fields shall yield their spicy breath,
And zephyrs nectar spirit gently bear
Its balmy burthen round thy flowing vest.
O listen fairest as thy name-sake did,
In soft Vanclusa's vale to Petrarch's woe.
My tuneful breath shall often wake the quill
To songs of love, of solace and delight,
If thou my fair one deign a gracious smile.
Come then, my Laura, sweeter than the muse,
I'll press thy spotless innocence once more,
And wanton o'er thy bosom's dainty mold,
The downy throne of love:  worthy a God!
The speaking purple of thy glowing cheek,
And 'suasive language of thy diamond eye,
Thy polish'd neck, sweet clad in balmy snow,
And hair dishevel'd o'er thy flowing vest,
Disporting with the breeze full wanton wild,
O'ercome the gazing swain; too soon he finds
Delusive love enervates all the soul,
And sweetly kills!  O you of tender mold,
Who feel too soon its nectar-tickling sting,
(As when Monimia erst my heart had stole)
Avoid the view, nor soften into love.
What does not bear the shock of cank'ring time?
The flinty pyramid, the attic dome,
In nodding ruins trembling from their base
Descend:  this vast rotundity we tread
Shall shortly be no more:  the blessed sun
Shall die, and trackless leave the skies.
The Babylonian spires, and Asia's boast
Are sunk; and tottering empires moulder down:
Palmyra's ruins claim th' attentive eye,
And teach th' historic sage, a grateful truth,
That wealth and grandeur soon, ah!  soon shall cease;
That virtue only stamps the worth of man,
"And makes the noble, bear a better name."
One moral truth from Ripsford's ruins learn
Ye mealy-feather'd fops, ye sons of vice,
Who in soft dalliance, in the harlot's lap,
Dream false of pleasures, labyrinths of woe.
Nested in woods the stately structure rear'd
Its awful head:  now in decaying pride,
Its master's lordly step it owns no more.
Had virtue here but kept the loosen'd reins
Of kindled passion and unbridled lust,
He might have liv'd like nature's eldest sons
Sincerely good, whilst Hygeia's smile sustain'd
A body free from sickness, and a mind
Bravely determined to resist the tide
Of vice, corruption, faction, and deceit.
Fronting the deep, with a low'ring brow,
Yon gloomy rock uprears its awful head:
Here, as tradition tells, th' infected tribes
Were kept, when thousand deaths the sea-girt shore
Of Albion saw:  the circumambient heav'n
Was big with death; and every breeze was bane.

O may the guardian angel of our isle,
From the dire pest her generous sons defend,
Nor thin her cities more!  nor let her youth
Sink void of wounds, and die without renown!

Thy verdant meads with silver daisies gay,
Where flowrets breathe their little lives in air,
Bloom wanton wild, and scent the tissued sky.
O Sambourne tempt the poet's grateful lay,
Whilst health still wantons on the western breeze,
And lyric larks, encomiasts of the sky,
Inspire us with enthusiastic warmth
To catch their notes, though tremulously high,
And in fame's golden ecchoing trump to sound,
With full-blown cheeks, the seat of rural ease,
On either hand the waste and low-brow'd rock,
With lowing herds and bleating sheep around,
A goodly group of every size and age.
We want not here the stately gorgeous dome,
Tho' regal pomp has swell'd the structure high.
Give me, O give me but a cleanly cot,
A book, a friend, a brisk enliv'ning glass,
A modest damsel heark'ning to my call,
I wish no more; but wish my king as much.
Yon peaceful villa glittering to the view,
Commands a lengthen'd prospect far away,
Where towns embosom'd 'midst the tufted woods,
(Known by the smoke in curling clouds) arise.
Or up the mazes of thy well-known hill,
O Dowles, I'll hasten, and I'll there survey
The prospect wide, and Bewdley's naval store.
Full oft, when youthful pleasures swell'd his veins,
The poet here has breath'd the vital air,
'Midst social converse, and 'midst friendship pure:
Unnumber'd blessings on the dove-like wing
Of sacred friendship guard the few that love.


BOOK II.
Creative bard!  expand thy fairy scene,
And with thy images enrich my song.
O gentle Spencer!  now in beauties praise
My numbers are to roll from Edmund's store.
Flush'd with the thought thy hospitable muse,
Father of fancy!  lends her mystic charms,
And darts her radiance in a sparkling glance,
Full mantling on my brain.  Now I feel
The genial impulse and the flow of soul.
Enthusiasts now I like a madman rave,
And oh!  a madness sacred, pure and clear,
Divinely caught by beauties sun-clad eye;
Not like the sons of darkness and of sly disguise,
Who grin damnation to a gaping crew.
Some drops distil and purge the mental ray,
Divine religion, thou heart-easing fair,
From mists that cloud the mind and blunt the soul:
O give me to enjoy thee pure and clear,
And then may German folios rest; and all
The horrid stuff that brain-sick fools adore.
Now when the spring in amice-green array'd,
Purfled in various robes of flushing hue,
Invests the laughing plains; with jocund glee
May beauty still inspire thy honest sons,
O Chaddesly, seat of pleasant rural ease;
May never slander's viper's tongue disturb
The happy moments of so sweet repose,
That might give softness to a Petrarch's muse,
Or kindle rapture in a Shenstone's page.
Soft made and temper'd with aetherial hands,
Ye finer souls!  who give expanse of thought
Freely to roam, and pinion'd on the wings
Of eagle fancy, dare an arduous task,
Oh shun the dastard wretch who smiling stabs
His neighbour's fame: &mdash; For you ye happy fair,
Taught with nice judgment to conceive,
And scorn to vie with asses and with apes,
For you the poet plans the tuneful verse,
And consecrates the strain.  Once more he prays,
May pure elysian gales, from spicy beds
Of western odours, fan the vernal grove,
And ever bless the harmless charming fair.
For foliaged columns, nor corinthian stone,
The feminine Ionick, nor Tuscan dome,
Howe'er in just proportion they agree,
Commanding wonder to a gaping clown,
Can still the throbbing of the guilty breast,
That sells its charms for lucre base of gold:
It ever bites with more corroding tooth,
Than could the deadly python of the Nile;
It preys upon the vitals, gnaws the soul.
Curs'd be the man, tho' all the aegyptian mines
Embowell'd own' his masterly command,
Whoe'er he be, that sells his virgin's charms
For mean and sordid dust:  be warn'd ye fair,
Whilst vernal-tinctur'd purple bends the cheek
'Midst sportive lillies elegantly sweet,
Be grateful to the best, nor sell your charms;
The constant boy with truth and honour fraught,
Encircled in eternity of love,
O give the future promise of your joy.
Now soft reclin'd amid' arcadian scenes,
Impart a cordial to his pleasing smart,
As welcome as the rosy month of May,
And gently listen to his faithful tale:
For thousand, nay, ten thousand woes attend
The contrary extream:  may manly hearts,
With sacred love and honour hand in hand,
Protect each constant fair in mutual love.
May virtue's banner, cloath'd in purest white
And plenty pour around her copious sweets:
May rosy'd health sit cheerful on their brow,
And prattling children on their mothers knee
Full often lisp the tedious time away.
Such does Ianthe in her Theron's arms
Fulfil, and crowns the poet's honour'd song,
And draws the ardor of the youthful muse,
In Bewdley's praise, to end the tuneful strain.
Long had the youth o'er painted virgins rov'd,
Long caught the side-long glance from beauty's eye;
But sweet Ianthe presses to his arms,
By virtue, beauty, and good sense endear'd.
Tho' many a fair in vivid bloom full blown,
Mantled with joy to meet the lovely lip;
For them each vernal-tinctur'd gale expands
The sweets of all Arabia's spicy breath,
And proud to swell Ianthe's curling vest,
Saluting make th' injurious mantle rise.
Here honour, love, good nature, far excel
The hoarded pelf that peevish misers lure
Their tassels with that Kiss, and cling for gold,
Or to the arms of impotence and age
Give all their virgin charms.  Live always blest,
Ye envy'd pair, in generous breasts rever'd,
And prove a truth, that Albion's sons should know
That Bewdley once could boast a Constant Pair.
May ev'ry virtuous youth with mutual wish
Thy great example take, and copy thee;
For happiness attendant waits on love,
That generous love, I mean, that still contemns
The mean and sordid ways that gold directs,
Such as a Winnington despised, and such
That gods condemn, tho' fools on earth adore.

But other themes invite my wand'ring song,
Tho' still reluctant from the pleasing task
The muses turn away; Lorenzo deign
With patience for to hear my devious song.
Tho' snow-complexion'd toasts beguile the sons
Of riot and debauch, yet modest worth
Demands the luxury of tender thought;
Friend may I call thee, then thou dearest forgive
The faults attendant on impetuous youth,
And could thy Akinside or Hurst inspire
With teeming thought the once unclouded soul,
Then would I bribe success, and bravely sing
A strain, thought worthy of Lorenzo's ear;
But graver strains invite me far, to loose
The tender Ovid's wailings to the wind,
And give Tibullus to a looser hour;
Tho' scarcely can I leave the tittering train,
The taper figures and the iv'ry neck,
The pratling fair ones, nor those hills of snow.
But penury attends the muses song,
That melts in softness all the soul away,
Long censur'd by the plodding sons of prose,
And often banish'd from the lib'ral heart.
Here pensive virtue drops a silent tear,
And at the thought the muses turn away;
Their sister sculpture, from the languid hand
The chizzel drops, and painting stands confess'd,
Ready to sketch their features to the world.
Far from promotion's view then let me die,
And eat my bread in peace and sweet content:
Tho' envious fortune on a flimzy crew
Her favours show'rs, let me in cheerful ease
Enjoy the sweetness that the muses bring,
The slender pittance of sequester'd life;
My Pomfret there shall teach me how to live,
And Tillotson instruct me how to die.
Pleas'd then I'd smile and mark creation's pow'r,
When Armstrong's sober laws direct me best
What suits the body and infest the mind;
A poet he, and touch'd by heav'n's own fire,
Who wakes the string, and through the thrilling breast
Breaths a gay rapture, sweet almost to pain!
In polish'd phrase, or solemn pomp of sounds,
Exalts, inflames, and captivates the soul,
If generous love or gratitude inspire.
For him the muse the sacred laurel crops,
And binds its hallow'd wreath around his brow:
Nor should I wander devious from the way,
Had I the lights of that poetic mind,
Who when an infant to his lips applied
The loud Papinian trump, and boldly sung
Fraternal rage and guilty Thebe's alarms.
Howe're imperfect, pardon the attempt
Of youthful ardour, and permit that I
My little knowledge to my country share,
Till some more able for the great essay
(Who all the Alps of science has survey'd)
With charms that grace it dignifies the theme.
May clouds of odours from the western breeze,
That gently fan the undulating sky,
For ever bless with animated bloom
Her honest sons:  may fost'ring winds attend
The freighted barge, and safely her conduct
Into the wish'd-for home; nor fright'ning elements,
With winds tempestuous, dash the loaded bark,
And melt the widow's heart in bitter moan
Of tender wailings for a husband's loss.
O could the soul of Homer from her sphere
Shed its sweet influence o'er my ravish'd soul,
Then would I sing her pomp and naval store,
Her sons as busy as th' industrious bee;
Her wealth, her trade, and honest zeal,
Proud in her self the little mart disdains
A foreign aid:  her sons inured to toil,
Through winds tempestuous brighten India's store,
May zephyrs musky wing the landskip fan
With gales of health in gentle ev'ning tide,
Dispreaden wide o'er all thy purpled lawns.
For thee, my Laura, may each flushing grove
And vermil garden yield its spicy breath;
The blooming orchard and the painted green,
Sketch'd by the pencil of all-nature's god;
The placid smile of Severn's dimply stream,
Her breast unruffled by the curling breeze;
The sky so grateful in the ev'ning hour,
Damask'd with purple, burnish'd o'er with gold;
The mellow thrush, and love-lorn nightingale,
All, all conspire to bless thy rural walk.

Let this memorial then at least suffice,
That erst to Bewdley's praise her native son
Attun'd the lyre, and erst obey'd the call
Of honour, truth, sincerity, and love.
