Tho' trifling be the subject &mdash; whilst my verse
Flows innocent, to me the critic's voice
Sounds light.  In Index-learning deeply-skill'd,
Let him pronounce his sentence as he lists,
Unmov'd I'll smile, nor wish for a reprieve,
But meet my doom, as easy as my theme.

Thou grand preserver of the mortal toe
From corns electric, tending to provoke
The oath tremendous, and distortive screw
Each feature from the human face divine!
Thy touch I welcome.  To the gouty foot
Sore vex'd with achings, and with tumours dire,
Pleasant administer of ease, all hail!
Great are thy benefits, for when old Time
Has made thy fabric somewhat worse for wear,
Serenely shall I sit in slipper'd ease.
Let the nice coxcomb grind his teeth with pain,
Face-making, while poor Crispin strains and sweats,
In pulling on his master-piece of art,
The pump dance-qualifying.  But oh!  my friend,
(If thou from racking twich wouldst sleep secure,
Or o'er the rough-worn pavement of the town
Tread safe) such ill spontaneous to avoid,
Dive rather, where some cellar warm and snug
Invites thee gradual.  The vulgar taunt
Demands contempt:  ne'er heed the low remarks
Of purse-proud Arrogance.  Consult thine ease;
From this, Life's temporary sweet proceeds.
Or pump, or shoe dost want?  here's choice of both.
Chuse well, for on the right of choice depends
Much future comfort.  Or if pride prevents
(That foe to honest deeds) and something new
Be correspondent to thy taste, behold,
Where in large flaming capitals superb
Stands Yorkshire Warehouse!  fraught with calceaments
Of largeness universal.  Cheapen here,
And save that shilling, which the man of trade,
Bred regular, would knavishly demand.
Thus saith Economy, and scorns Contempt!
Or hear, and dread, what prophesies the Muse:
In my mind's eye methinks I see thy feet
Crippl'd and weak, protuberant with nodes
Hard as the crabstic, or the knotted oak;
And, as you twist your features through the streets,
Methinks I hear the jeering schoolboy cry,
"Here comes Giles Gordon," whilst the child in arms
Screams out affrighted at thy hideous look,
And it its nurse's kerchief hides its head.
Confess then, when new shoe has wrung your foot,
In vain the needl'd wight exerts his skill,
You trembling all the while with shocking phiz
Of multi-form distortion, uglier far
Than Rackstraw chisels out Philosophers.
In vain eradication is essay'd,
The pungent corn returns.  That too destroy'd,
Another starts more dreadful than the last.
Thus, when the daring sinew-potent chief,
Alicides call'd, attack'd his hydra foe,
And greatly dash'd each horrid head away,
Another sprang, and proudly mock'd his toil;
Nor had the hero (tho' robust of arm,
And tough of heart, his vast enormous club
Wielding more nimble, than the man of fame,
Hight gladiator, brandishes his sword)
Accomplish'd his intent, but through the means
Of skill superior, and of aid divine.
