What!  tho' the Muse with her etherial wand
Ne'er touch'd me into fame, or lightly touch'd:
Tho' unpropitious to my frequent pray'r
She never wove a lasting wreath for me,
Yet have I caught some scatter'd leaves of bay
That fell unguarded from her open lap,
And round my brow presumptuously entwin'd
The precious remnants, blooming but to fade,
Contented, tho' they wither'd on my brow.
Your splendid portals, with festoons of flow'rs
Purfled by Fancy, will you not unlock,
Ye sisters amiable!  and give one glimpse
Of your enchanting Paradise. &mdash; Ah no!
For faithful Genius keeps the sacred key.
Then, Nature!  thou, thy rude rough pencil lend,
Truth-fashion'd &mdash; bear me to some rural cot,
Far from the bust'ling tumult of the town,
And seat me in the Chimney-corner &mdash; snug,
Where crackles bavinwood, or kindly beech
It's gen'rous heat bestows, or quadrate turf
Burns dimly to the eye.  Here pleas'd I sit
Contemplative, and laugh at elbow-chair
Of costly damask, edg'd with gilded nail.
Ah!  what delights the carpet-cover'd floor
Magnificent!  or that from Persia's realm
Imported o'er; or that of humbler woof
In looms Wiltonian! &mdash; What!  the marble hearth
Diversify'd with many a mimic cloud,
Or ostentatious of its azure veins,
And shelf adorn'd with strange unmeaning forms,
If pure Content be wanting.  This alone
Silver's the pewter spoon, and by the aid
Of that great alchemist, we Fancy call,
Transmutes the basest metal into gold.
Content! &mdash; Oh pleasing sound!  thy very name
My pulse invigorates.  In quicker waves
Bounds thro' my veins the crimson tide of life,
And brighter looks the fluid of each eye.
Whate'er of happiness, Idea forms,
Beams o'er my soul its influence benign.
Tutor'd by thee, Grief thinks her burthen light,
Great reconciler of events that seem
Improbable; for thro' thy mirror seen
Shade turns into substance, poverty to wealth,
Queen of the placid brow, and eye serene!
On whom the gloomy, rain-impregnate cloud
No terror sheds, whose firm-embosom'd heart
The tempest-croaking raven cannot shake,
Come, with thy sister Patience &mdash; hither come,
And lead me to thy cot, where Temperance,
Thy handmaid, holds the decent cup of health.

Here, to the cricket's intermitting song
I listen pleas'd:  nor less grimalkin's purr
Delights me, with the noise of chatt'ring jay
In osier basket perch'd, beyond the reach
Of little puppy yelping underneath;
Dame partlet too, attended by her brood,
Cackling her glee, the kitchen concert fills.

Here, free from jargon, and the technic terms
Of knowledge superficial, I regale
My nose with Trimdado, valu'd erst
By braggart Bobadil.  As oft the cloud
Voluminous I raise, reflect I must
On thee, oh GARRICK!  when in Drugger's form
Thy droll address, excites the comic laugh.
Thanks to thee, son of Nature!  Much of mirth,
And much of intellect I owe to thee.

Warm clad in humble vest, the farce of dress
I reck not, heedless of the veering vane
Of fashion.  Leave I that to playhouse spark,
Who loves to shine the comet of the night,
Proud in balcony, foremost in the trains
Of fops, who buzz their nonsense by the hour.
Here, in my caxon, that disdains a curl,
The ceremonious tye of barrister
Loquacious, boasting its redundant locks,
I laugh to scorn.  Externals I despise,
Tho' character, much-fam'd for aspect sage,
Nor less renown'd for vacancy of thought,
Should strongly plead for privilege of form.
Formality &mdash; what's that?  a public cheat
On common sense &mdash; that struggles hard to make
Her spurious guinea pass for sterling gold;
Who, bankrupt like, rears high her haughty head,
Blust'ring superb, to catch the vulgar eye,
And to elude Suspicion's eagle-watch.
But half the world are prostitutes to form,
And gravity of brow.  Hence swarms each street
With Aesculapian wings.  The beardless youth
Hight pharmacopolist, ere yet he knows
The painted gallipot's contracted terms,
His master emulates, and tucks his locks
Beneath a load of scientific hair.
Thus tonsor-arm'd, and dangling clouded cane,
With solemn step, and forehead wondrous wise,
Stalks forth the great phenomenon abroad,
Looking august importance.  Hence the fee
Of counsellor enlarges.  'Tis the sun
That sheds a lustre round each dunghill thought,
And to the barren boy, from guardian's chain
Enfranchis'd, give a Lytteltonian grace.
Without it, what were medicinal skill,
Or what the deep farrago of the law!
Who would commit his fever-burning pulse
To bag-wig doctor?  Or who state his case
To chamber-counsel, if he wore his hair?

Mean time, with dumpling hard and bacon firm,
The oblong culinary board is spread.
Ceres is there in shape of lusty loaf
Adust, adorn'd with many a mark oblique,
Device of housewife:  and the good old knight,
So universally caress'd, is there,
Hight Sir John Barleycorn.  In nappy ale
Nut-brown he stands, inviting to the taste.
The clock strikes three.  In pour the rustic rout,
And at the sight of stranger doff their hats
With complaisance uncouth.  A native blush
Pictures each honest weather-beaten face,
That rivets my regard.  At length appears,
With implement of labour in his hand,
The farmer boon, and on his open brow
Sits Hospitality array'd in smiles,
While Health presents him with her freshest rose.
Fat Plenty round his swelling waist robust
Her belt has buckled, and athwart his shoe
Frugality has ty'd her leathern thong.
Jocund he comes.  Behind, his watchful dog
Close cringes at his heels, an emblem strict
Of rare fidelity.  Blush, mortals, blush!
And learn one grateful lesson from a brute.
He comes.  His dame surveys him with a smile,
Firm token of his welcome.  Round his neck
His brawny arms he throws, and greets her well.
Then lolls in cushion'd chair.  Nor long he sits
Before he spies his friend, whom clouds of smoke,
Pipe-issuing, at first from view conceal'd.
Me narrowly he kens from head to foot,
Then recollects the features he had lost
Of quondam schoolfellow.  What raptures then
Ensue!  The hearty manual shake, the hug
Close-griping, and the tear affectionate
Dewing his manly cheek:  sensation soft!
Read and tender, worthy Friendship's name.
Now scenes of former prospects rush to view,
Heart-pleasing.  Fond enquiries then succeed
Of brother playmates in the days of school:
And, while we talk of separated friends,
Some dead, and some to foreign climes remov'd
Beyond Hope's telescope, descends again
The tear humane, and mutual is our grief,
For mutual was our love.  "But come," quoth he,
"Cheer up, nor let thy courage be cast down,
Thus runs the good old song.  See there my friend,
The table spread, and on't a sav'ry hock,
Remnant of flitch well-dry'd.  Fall to," quoth he,
"And eat thy fill &mdash; right welcome as myself."
So saying, from his leather sheath he draws
His knife, but newly ground, and instant cuts
A sliver longitudinal, enough
To startle invalid.  To see him bolt
The thick, firm slices down, with relish due,
And gulp the fatt'ning bev'rage, rouzes up
My ling'ring appetite.  The jovial train,
Entrencher'd round, he views with eyes of joy,
And universal merriment presides.

Here, Luxury, thou nymph of squeamish taste!
Be present &mdash; from thy shaking, nerveless hand,
Drop thy provocatives, and learn how much
Of lusty Health on Exercise depends.

The Dinner o'er, each to his station hies
Light-hearted.  While before the chimney side
Straddles my honest friend in easy chair,
I creep to fav'rite corner.  There my pipe
Pleas'd I resume, and on my finger nail
Knock out the remnant ashes.  Straight my host
Presents his pouch, stuff'd hard with Indian weed,
Fragrant as nosegay in the month of June&mdash;
Enters the housewife with a jug replete
Of home-brew'd, produce of the last year's crop.
We drink &mdash; then gaily fill our clay-form'd tubes,
And drink twice more before we light.  So prompts
Convivial maxim.  Whoso breaks this rule
Subverts the chart of Bacchanalian mirth.
To fragrant leaf we then the coal apply,
And give it scope to burn.  Ascend the fumes
In aromatic wreath, high over head
Forming a clouded canopy.  There tranc'd
We sit, nor envy aught beneath the Moon.

Ye sons of Care!  on pinnacle of state
High elevated, hither turn your eyes,
Look down, and pity if you can.  Avaunt
Your garter'd honours, and your titled names!
If for these toys the unpolluted heart
Must barter its integrity.  Farewell!
(When all the sparks of honesty are quench'd)
Content of mind, that life of life below,
And faithful index to the life to come.
Farewell all mirth!  the retrospective thought
That on the roll of Mem'ry sees no ill
In CAPITALS recorded, oh, farewell!
What can compensate for the loss of peace!
What lenient balm the torment can assuage
Of troubled Conscience!  or what opiate lull
To placid slumber, when Reflection keen
Her bitter, counteracting potion holds!
Ever, dear Honesty!  be thou my guide,
And I shall walk unerring.  Guardian Peace
Shall smooth my pillow then, and pleasing dreams,
Unknown to wicked Wealth, compose my mind.

But see!  the daughter of my happy friend,
The darling of his genuine love, advance,
The child of Innocence, and by her side
A lamb, associate meet, whose head she pats
In fondling attitude.  The nurseling meek
Licks in return her soft good-natur'd hand,
More pleasing far this scene of rural life
Than all the stroke the painter's pencil gives;
'Tis Nature in its purity, and needs
No artful light or shade to trick it off.
Quick to her father's loving knees she clings,
And prattles amiable.  The kiss sincere
Of mutual love is interchang'd.  Excess
Of tend'rest rapture fills the mother's eye.
Throughout the scenes of Nature, is there one
Like this, that dawns such gladness on the soul,
And bliss beyond conception, but of those
Who taste connubial joys?  How sweeter far
The face of Cupid looks, when he vouchsafes
To sit with Hymen in the bow'r of Love,
Than when he roams at large!  Ye libertines!
Who in the fever of high spirits stray
Thro' Pleasure's paths delusive, where the thorn
Lurks in the foldings of the rose, oh!  say,
What are your transports when compar'd to these?
Painful similitude!  For once confess
Your conduct wrong.  Confess it, and reform.

Think not, ye few select!  of letter'd fame,
Deep-vers'd in classic lore, that Ignorance
Reigns here:  for on the decent cleanly shelf,
Displays Religion her immortal page,
From family to family transmitted down;
And many a curious volume here is found
Didactically penn'd; nor is there lack
Of books amusive, such as prompt the cheek
To wear the dimple of a harmless smile.
Such is my comfort, such my honest joy,
In rural Chimney-corner.  Nor, ye Great!
On whom kind Fortune sheds her welcome smile,
My taste despise.  For, if at me ye laugh,
Yourselves ye satirize.  Like me ye love
The country's healthy fare.  Like me ye prize
The Chimney-corner, and at vacant hour,
Eager as fish at fly, ye gladly seize
Fair Opportunity.  Behind your chaise
The full portmanteau stands, and down ye whirl
Uneasy, till ye reach your little vill,
The solace of your souls; where Silence leads
To moralizing Thought, and calm Content
Denies old Care his entrance at the door.
Away the demon steers his weary flight,
On cumbrous wings, to atmosphere more dense,
And seeks his native mansion of the town.
