While yellow moon light clears the summer field,
And nature's beauties wanton to the view;
Impress'd by thee, sweet Poetry, I yield,
To trace the lines that fancy's pencil drew.

Ah!  Heav'nly solitude, most lovely maid!
How oft alone, thro' woods and wilds unseen,
Lost to the world, sequester'd have I stray'd,
To muse with thee on life's still varying scene.

Where weeps the willow o'er the languid stream,
And whisp'ring zephyrs breathe the leaves among,
That teach the little lonely bat to skim
With murky wing, the river's face along:

Stands a huge pile, the work of ages past,
Whose turrets rise upon the sylvan steep;
Where weeps the spirit of the winter's blast;
And owls, that shun the light, their vigils keep.

With awe I trace thy wild dismantl'd form,&mdash;
Thy once proud hall, now open to the wind;&mdash;
Thy groaning walls, deep mark'd with many a storm,
That overlook the nodding grove behind.

Where, dread to tell, in legendary tale,
Did whining ghosts their themes of wo impart,
Where music floated thro' the midnight vale
And dwelt, protected, necromancy's art.

Alas!  that hall, where once perhaps has rung,
The sounding circle of illustrious name;
When Bards of old their songs of triumph sung,
That now survive but in their country's fame.

Thy moss-clad Chapel hast'ning to decay,
That yet may boast the sculptor's nicest art;
Where superstition bore its mystic sway,
And sweet Religion bath'd the swollen heart.

Here usher'd in the odour-breathing morn,
With matin songs and sweet celestial lays;
On beauty's voice the vesper hymn was bourne,
And midnight masses bade the Chapel blaze.

Ye echoing rocks, that witness'd oft the strain,
When, loudly swelling on the rising blast,
Remembrance wakes her fancy-thrilling train,
And for a while participates the past.

Ye mould'ring walls, that rev'rence mantles o'er,
With holy awe dispensing, touch the heart;
That bid us still thy mournful state deplore,
And in thy maxims take a willing part.

See here the marks of time's all-conqu'ring hand&mdash;
The speaking retrospect of earthly boast;
Relentless pow'r that nought on earth can stand,
But must resign its prowess in the dust!

Aspiring man!  still frailer state is thine;
With all thy towering prospects vainly sped;
The morning sun, in lustre sees thee shine,&mdash;
Pale Cynthia's blush, thy glaring blossoms shed.

The great good man that better days has known,
Like Roslin's turrets mark'd with fortune's blast,
And dire misfortune in his feature's shown,
Will still a monument of virtue last.

For like these walls, tho' now in ruins laid,
He holds his value with the wise and good;
His sacred person none will dare invade,
And sullen &mdash; seems as great as when he stood.
