A Youthful pair, whom mutual love endears,
Now cheer'd with hopes, now chill'd with jealous fears,
In the cool shades of Scarb'rough's sweet recess,
Thus in complaining notes their thoughts express.

STREPHON.
Say, lovely maid, of ev'ry charm possest,
Has Strephon full possession of thy breast?
Am I alone, of all the num'rous train,
Frequenting Scarb'rough scenes, thy favour'd swain?
And may I safe the pleasing thought enjoy,
That rivals never shall my peace destroy?

CAELIA.
Sure Strephon's eyes and heart have lately stray'd,
And now wou'd tax with change his faithful maid:
'Twas surely hence that whilst Climene sung,
You as enchanted on her accents hung;
Such fix'd attention charm'd your ravish'd ear,
You surely quite forgot that I was near.

STREPHON.
'Tis true, her angel's voice for ever charms,
I own her magick song my bosom warms;
But &mdash; 'tis because her strain so aptly shows
The love which Strephon for his Caelia knows.
But say, my Caelia, &mdash; Was it choice or chance,
That Damon was thy part'ner in the dance?

CAELIA.
If Strephon wou'd in those amusements join,
No other partner ever shou'd be mine;
I swear he took me out against my will,
But I'll my sex's vanity forgoe,
Rather than Strephon shall disquiet know.

STREPHON.
Bright nymph, thy ev'ry act to love inspires,
And all the world thy matchless skill admires.
If on the sands the ev'ning walk you joyn,
Like Cynthia mid the fainter stars you shine,
And sure when yonder waves thy limbs embrac't
Caelia the sea-born Venus far surpast,
The ball but thinly fills, if you're not there,
The long room's crowded, if my love appear,
And whilst thy beauties thus transcendent shine,
I ask my anxious heart if they be mine?

CAELIA.
O sympathy of love!  these am'rous cares,
Alike my corresponding bosom shares:
From the same cause our mutual fears arise,
Both fear to lose, what both intensely prize.

STREPHON.
Yet let thy oft-repeated vows assure,
Thy love to Strephon ever shall endure.
Like that, which late on Scarbro' cliff you made,
As thence the spreading ocean we survey'd:
'Twas there my Caelia breath'd this solemn vow,
The seas, O Strephon, shall forget to flow,
Or up this steepy cliff its waves convey,
Before my plighted faith to thee decay.

CAELIA.
And thy protesting words I still retain,
The everlasting treasure of my brain;
When, lovely maid, thy faithful Strephon swerves,
From thee, dear nymph, whom he with rapture serves,
This steepy cliff shall sink, that vale shall rise,
And earth be mingled with the vaulted skies.

STREPHON.
Firm as the base of earth that vow shall prove,

CAELIA.
And mine as durable as skies above.
