Pensive sat Colin at the break of day,
His bleating flocks around him sporting play:
New fragrance stealing as they sweep the plain,
The morning breezes fan the thoughtful swain;
On quiv'ring wings the songsters of the sky
O'er his head hover, or fleet warbling by;
But not the beauties of the morn display'd,
Nor bleating flocks that sporting round him play'd,
Nor fragrant breezes, nor the warbling throng
That near him thrill'd the sweetly varying song,
Chase from his breast the glooms of dark despair,
Or from his brow disperse the clouds of care;
But lo!  his Phaebe with a graceful mien,
Now swiftly trips it o'er the distant green;
At her approach he slowly rais'd his head,
And thus with looks of love and grief he said.

COLIN.
'Tis Thursday morn, lo!  yonder rising sun
Hastes the last remnant of his course to run,
Ere noon 'tis finish'd, and his fading light,
Then leaves these fields in everlasting night;
Some gloomy pow'r usurps his golden throne,
And sweeps us, Phaebe, to some realms unknown,
Some unknown realms, where Phaebe, sought in vain,
No more with am'rous wiles shall charm her swain;
Time was, that Colin on thy heaving breast
Was sooth'd from care, and lull'd to blissful rest;
With thee reclining on the mountain's brow,
The prospect charm'd, yet lovelier prospect thou!
With thee, in dance I lightly trod the green,
Blithe as the fairies by pale moonlight seen.&mdash;

PHAEBE.
O Colin!  let me stop that rising sigh,
Sooth thy pain'd beast, and wipe thy swimming eye;
With thee I'll go, whatever woes betide,
Cure what I can, and what I can't, divide;
Shou'dst thou thro' air in furious winds be hurl'd,
In the same storm I'd drive from world to world;
Shou'dst thou glide silent o'er the haunted plain,
With wings of love I'd catch my darling swain.

COLIN.
Vain frantic thought!  thy Colin far from thee
Shall soon be wafted, on some stormy sea,
Or wrapt in clouds, and blown we know not where,
Our pale grim ghosts shall whirl about in air;
Shalt thou then bloom thus eminent in charms?
Then can'st thou catch me panting to thy arms?

PHAEBE.
But gentle minds a gentler fate shall share,
Nor wrapt in clouds, nor blown we know not where;
For there are blissful plains, sweet scenes below,
Where faithful lovers never taste of woe;
Where streams for ever purl, and zephyrs sigh,
And rising flow'rs spontaneous sweets supply:
There close embow'r'd within the myrtle grove,
The best shall triumph in immortal love;
There ever constant, Colin shall abide,
And Phaebe smile, forever at his side.

COLIN.
For faithful lovers this, for thee, remains;
But what for faithless nymphs, and perjur'd swains?
Inconstant, cruel, I but once was true,
True to one fair, and that one fair was you;
Inconstant, cruel, to the nymph I woo'd,
In vain her feet my parting steps persu'd;
In vain did Phillis, drowning ev'ry grace,
Bedew with pearly drops her lovely face;
Deaf to her cries, and to her sorrows blind,
To pale despair her love, my scorn, resign'd:
So shall just heav'n reject the pray'rs I make,
And scorn my sighs and tears, for Phillis' sake.

PHAEBE.
This hour, repentant, to the nymph return,
For thee her breast still beats, her wishes burn;
Soon reconcil'd, her pray'rs shall rise with thine,
A sweet atonement to the pow'rs divine.

COLIN.
But say, can'st thou resign my fond embrace,
And view a rival happy in thy place?
When thro' elysium at my side she roves,
And sighs eternal love in Pluto's groves?

PHAEBE.
Alas!  thy words have taught my heart to fear;
To Damon faithless, tho' to thee sincere;
His vows I heard, and bid him hope the bliss,
Receiv'd his presents, and return'd his kiss;
The proud of conquest, tho' subdu'd by thee,
With scorn I left him, yet he sighs for me:
To him I fly, on him my fate depends,
And mercy still, if he forgives, descends:
And witness thou, O sun!  suffus'd in endless night,
My guilty passion here at once shall end,
Of Colin, now no lover, but a friend;
With joy I'll see his years of bliss increase,
Where falshood, grief, and jealousy shall cease;
Damon shall smile to see his Phaebe shed
Elysian flow'rs, o'er happy Colin's bed.
In hallow'd urns to thee, unblam'd, I'll bring
The cooling crystal of the bubbling spring;
No envy there shall social hearts enthrall,
But each one's bliss, shall be the bliss of all.

She said, high noon arrives; the lovers found
The darkness fled, and daylight pour'd around;
And now, without remorse, th' embolden'd swain
Hugs close his Phaebe to his breast again;
For hapless Damon, Phaebe's scorn returns,
And all her breast with love for Colin burns.
Thus oft, with Fear, Repentance quits the heart;
Weigh well the moral that my strains impart.
