Plac'd at his table lonely Colin sate,
Neglected dinner cooling on his plate;
The best of bacon smoak'd to no effect,
Tho' round with pigeons, and with spinage deck't:
A leg of mutton went as it came on,
A perfect picture, 'twas so nicely done;
Alike to him was bak'd, and roast, and stew'd,
And if he pickt, 'twas but by habitude.
Cross'd o'er his fork, his unsoil'd knife was laid,
Unop'd his napkin, and unbroke his bread.

Why loiters Rosalind?  Oh hasten home,
'Ere artichoaks are out of season; come,
Now apricots are just a coming in,
Oh!  hasten while the goslings yet are green.
How fast the season of good eating to is!
The chickens very soon will grow to fowls.
Love only in one situation stays,
And he remains a chicken all his days.

At early breakfast, bohea tea is sweet,
With charming butter'd rolls that make one eat;
Muffins are good, and pleasant 'tis at noon,
To bite a toast, and sip one's choc'late down.
A proper whet!  fragrant the kitchen smells
At dinner time, and knockers saves and bells,
Summons unneedful:  sweet the coming on
Of grateful coffee, after dinner's done.
Then silent night spreads out her table neat
For supper, and invites again to eat.
But neither early breakfast, nor the treat
Of charming butter'd rolls that make one eat,
Nor muffins, nor the proper whet at noon,
To bite a toast, and sip one's choc'late down,
Nor fragrance, when the heated kitchen smells
At dinner time, and knockers saves and bells,
Summons unneedful; nor the coming on
Of grateful coffee after dinner's done:
Nor silent night, tho' spread her table neat
For supper, without Rosalind, are sweet.

Lately our Strephon, in the meadows, found,
Mushrooms as fine as ever grew in ground,
For Rosalind we laid them by in store,
But the worms eat 'em, and they are no more.
Her shepherd thus is prey'd upon within,
For absence is a worm that works within.

There's goody Wilson (very kind indeed)
Sent me a pigeon of the savage breed.
I never saw a finer with my eyes,
It full of maggot's in the larder lies;
These things won't keep, no more do I, of late,
Know how to keep out maggots from this pate.

Thus sung the shepherd, till the fumes of sleep,
(At their known hour) did on his eyelids creep,
Steeping in gentle balm his tuneful care,
He sat and nodded in his elbow chair.
