Kath'rine and Deb'rah met one ev'ning late,
How fares your Roger, Deborah?  said Kate.

DEBORAH.
Ah!  Kate!  I've lost him!  lost my Roger quite!
Unhappy!  he departed yesternight!

KATE.
You 'fraught me, Deb. &mdash; no marvel that you weep!

DEBORAH.
This moment have I been to fold his sheep!

KATE.
Well!  he was fifty good things!  and above!
No maid, save Kate, but envy'd you his love!
Strong were his well-turn'd limbs, his skill was rare!

DEBORAH.
In strength and skill with him no swain cou'd pair!
All made him judge, for he was never wrong,
Who most out-went in dance, in pipe, in song!
Wrestling, or boxing the whole world will say,
On side of Roger all the 'vantage lay!

KATE.
Nay, altogether I must needs agree,
Few swains are made one tythe so well as he!

DEBORAH.
His hair in curls adown his shoulders flows,
His face with colours like the morning glows!
His eyes not raven-black, yet black enough!
His chest, waist, leg and foot just what they ought;
His foes, if foes he had, cou'd spy no fau't!

KATE.
His wit astonishful!  I shan't forget,
While Katherine is my name, his wond'rous wit!

DEBORAH.
His wit a justice of the peace struck dumb,
"Come hither, said his worship, Roger come!
How old may you be?"  "That, my shepherd cries,
An' please your worship!  that I can't devise!"
"Not know your age my lad!"  "Yes, I'm a score,
An' please your worship!  but I may be more."
Again this justice of the peace he flung,
And yet my shepherd's more than twice as young,
Who Sampson's father was he told when ask'd;
The justice you must own was harder task'd,
When with this question out my shepherd came,
Pray can your worship tell my father's name?
'Twas more than wit, for wagers have been laid,
That Roger was his worship's by his maid.

KATE.
Yet Roger was as very a wag as wit,
He oft with laughter made me almost split.

DEBORAH.
A pig was sent the squire from Colin's farm,
Safe in a bag it hung on Cloddy's arm,
Hodge tic'd him in to drink, and while they chat,
Took out the pig, and in he slipt a cat.
Away went Cloddy &mdash; to the squire's he came&mdash;
"An't please you Sir, a present from my dame,
Our sow has litter'd" &mdash; while he jabber'd thus,
Fumbling he oped the bag, and out leap'd puss;
What, says the squire, you play the wag I doubt!
Says Cloddy, zauns 'twas pig when I set out.
Back sped the clown, at the same ale-house door,
He met with Roger, and they drank some more;
And while they argufy so odd a case,
Puss was let out, and pig regain'd its place.
Home Cloddy goes, the strange mischance declares;
And shews the &mdash; pig, dame scolds, and Cloddy stares;
The thing got wind, and all the neighbours lay
The blame on Mother Mead, or Goody Grey,
For one bewitch'd three heifers at the mill,
And one three hogs of Susan's of the hill.

KATE.
Yet kind he was, for once a month he came,
And left a shilling with our Meg, that's lame.

DEBORAH.
One night, fro thro' our yard the foot path lies,
Fierce barks the dog, hollo!  a stranger cries,
"Pitch is the night, and I am lost beside,
Which way lives farmer Dobson of the Hide?"
My shepherd rose and told him, but the way
Thro' wilds and woods athwart the country lay;
So cloaths he don'd, and took his lanthorn strait,
And, tho' five miles, he lit him to the gate.
I've known him too, and in my mind, 'twas right,
Tend many a sickly lamb the livelong night;
Red-breast or not, he spar'd the nest with young,
Cudgel at shrovetide-cock he never flung;
And once I saw him at the baiting bull,
With heart just bursting, and with eyes brimful.

KATE.
Pious he was&mdash;

DEBORAH.
This all the parish knew,
For every Sunday he was in his pew;
Turn'd down the proofs, and was sincerely vex'd,
If he forgot the doctrine or the text.
Nay, night and morn, I've listen'd on the stairs,
He read some holy book, and said his pray'rs;
And all day long, and this be most his praise,
Of doing good he had a thousand ways.

KATE.
And he was&mdash;

DEBORAH.
Kath'rine!  in his praise I join,
Roger was every thing! &mdash; and he was mine!&mdash;
And I was his!  and couple half so blest
Dwells not from north to south, from east to west!
And blest again shall I and Roger be
At his return&mdash;

KATE.
But who that day shall see!

DEBORAH.
These eyes I trust&mdash;

KATE.
Now that he has turn'd your head?
You wou'd not see the ghost of one that's dead!

DEBORAH.
Thank heav'n!  he lives as much as you or I,
And never, never, never let him dye!

KATE.
Deb!  you still rave!  or else you did beguile,
As dead, have we not mourn'd him all this while?

DEBORAH.
We have, and, truly so sincere my woe,
Once I myself began to think him so;

KATE.
What mean'st thou Deb?

DEBORAH.
Why Kate!  the thing to clear,
He's only gone three weeks to Derbyshire!
Kate knew 'twas truth, because when this she said,
Deb laugh'd aloud &mdash; so both went home to bed.
