The cause accomplish'd after many a rubb,
And many a term elaps'd, with serious brow
Old Nichil sits him down, and o'er his desk
Transaction past revolves, contriving how
His Bill of Costs to frame.  He twirls his wig,
He strokes his chin, and to his nose applies
"The pungent grains of titillating dust."
Much he exerts his cogitative pow'rs,
Studious how best to cook the matter up,
And, after all deductions, how to make
The ballance in his favour.  "Labor hic,
Hoc opus."  O'er his may-bundled notes,
And memorandums private, oft he turns
Then minutes each occurrence.  Ev'ry act
And trivial circumstance recorded stands.
The long, long declaration, on whose base
All actions are erected, life o' th' cause,
And origin of matter, swells the charge.
To this succeeds a fee to council paid
Of one pound one, to methodize the draught.
Good harmless man!  he strives not to abridge
Prolixity &mdash; but, like an honest dealer,
Gives amplest measure &mdash; lengthens ev'ry count,
And puzzles special pleader.  Without hand
Of council sage, attorney!  what art thou!
What, but an animal, that fear'st to tread
The boggy heath of law without a guide.
What art thou with him?  tell to me I pray;
What, but a great man-child in leading-strings!
What, but a hobby-horse, on whose jaded back
The jocky rides, and spurs thee to the goal.

Now after many an intervening fee
The closing grand one comes, and tho' the last,
Not least inferior.  Term-fee it is call'd.
Oh!  pleasing sound!  and yet more pleasing still
The silver profits that accrue from thee,
Thou total sum of lucre without loss!
Right sage the wight, who tack'd thee to his bill,
And privileg'd thee first.  Howe'er the don,
Prothonotary height, or Master, dare
With plumed instrument each clause to prune,
And lop whole fees away, he durst not touch
This monument of value &mdash; for the love
He bears his office, and authority,
He durst not &mdash; 'tis the due of ev'ry term,
A tax on clients, and th' attorney's charter.
At length 'tis finish'd.  On poor client's eye
It swells astonishing.  Term after term,
Vac. after vac. he sees expences rise,
And swears in bitterness of heart to find
Himself at last the debtor; for he thought,
Weak, foolish man!  the balance due to him.
But most he frets, and vents his fruitless rage,
In anguish o'er the term-fee.  "This, he cries,
Stings home &mdash; it cuts &mdash; it rives my very soul;
This heavy charge for doing nought at all;
This premium for laziness." &mdash; This said,
From pocket he extracts his purse, pays down
The sum demanded &mdash; exit with a frown,
And damns attornies for a set of K&mdash;.
