Plaints, unattempted yet in bill or count,
Ope, heavenly muse!  and, OCKHAM!  thou thine ear,
Thy gracious ear, still open to th' oppress'd,
Th' insane, the widow'd, fatherless and poor,
Vouchsafe indulgent, while thy suppliant shews
How bound, avent'rous in pursuit of FEE,
Days, nights, and terms and seasons he turmoil'd
Thro' the rough realms of year-books and reports,
(Dark, chearless regions!) till disasters dire
Him fierce beleagur'd, and aloof detain'd
Friends, viands, comfort &mdash; Ah!  at plaints like these
Of sheriff-myrmidons, or duns obdur'd,
Who can from tears refrain?  even thou who clos'st
Death's dreadful sentence, by the name JACK KETCH
Fam'd and abhorr'd, even thou, wilt gentle tear
Let fall, and wonder at thy soft'ning heart.

Wig-powdering JACOB, who each morn assails
Chaps horrid with mustachios, dares not more
Approach me, gastred by the grizly fiends,
That sore belay me; nor on morn or eve
Makes SUSAN visitations; SUSAN, skill'd
To whirl a mop, and deck sleeps downy couch
With art unequal'd, as CRUSEIS erst
Grac'd AGAMEMNON'S.  Nor in these alone
Excell'd the peerless:  She forth sparkling flint
Could conjure VULCAN, and rebate the rage
Of EURUS, noxious to quiescent scribe.
Bereav'd, O SUSAN!  of thy tender aid,
Where now shall I repose me?  how console
Me thus bemeagred?  Ah!  how fall'n, how chang'd
From what thou clasp'd enamour'd, while on morns
I clung extatick to thy roseat lips,
Thy lips more fragrant than imperial tea,
Or spice Arabian.  Farewell, happy morns!
Ye morns of dalliance!  Now nor roseat lips,
Nor blaze enlivening, nor amusive tea,
(Tea, lov'd potation of the taleful fair!)
Nor choc'late, strength'ner of the back and reins,
Nor brain-composing coffee, on morns provoke
Detractive tale, or amorous disport.
But vile insipid, by the vulgar call'd
Gruel, meet diet for lank-cheek'd spleen,
Me lonely sipping saddens, nor admits
Or bloom encrimson'd, or fermenting vein.

But ah!  when PHOEBUS baits at half-way house,
And ringing gratulations chime aloud
Meridian gain'd, straight hunger with the news
Makes eager visitation, and disturbs
Deep contemplations on th' important case
Of JOHN OF STYLES.  Oh!  hunger!  worst of duns
From thee, nor lord's protection, Dies non,
Nor borrow'd name, nor lodgings chang'd, nor park,
Nor other place of privilege can save!
What should I do?  nor promises avail,
Nor shield of patience, tho' by Mulcibers
Celestial temper'd.  Furious oft to calm
Th' outrageous fiend, I plunge, but plunge in vain
In pocket vacant, my officious hand;
And sigh, and rave, and curse the tardy pace
Of sluggard time; till temple-horn aloud,
With blast heart-chearing, to repast forth calls
The sable bands, from chambers, coffee-house,
Where-e'er they commune, or on moot or quirk,
Intrigues or favours.  Rav'nous as the bird,
Hight SCARE-CROW, darts at carrion, nor unlike,
Wrapt in my tatter'd fables, forth I rush
To TEMPLE-HALL; there eye with secret glee
Clusters of rolls, brown bread, cheese, vinegar,
And all the dreadful instruments of rage
Efurient, knives and forks, and plates and spoons,
And mugs of verdant hue, on either side
Marshall'd in deep array.  I take my post,
And while GRACE-HERALD, with uplifted eyes,
Cants orison preludious, hark demure
As ROMISH priest, while bloomy nymphs confess,
Heats, palpitations, longings, languishments,
And dreams impure; nor yet or heaven or grace
Engage me; but what havock I shall make,
What cuts devour; with transport I forsee.
BEAR-GARDEN hero thus with cut or tap
Opiate of quarter-staff, in thought subdues
Antagonist, while prolonging on high
He wields, or club or back-sword, that portend
Indented nose, ribs batter'd, gashes dire,
And gushing gore:  to BRITAIN'S warlike sons
Delightful prospects!  Now with arms in hand,
Nor less resolv'd than PELEUS' wrathful son,
When fir'd with vengeance for his slaughter'd friend,
He strod in arms terrific, and assail'd
TROY'S heav'n-doom'd towers!  voracious down I plunge
On jaw-devoted shoulder, leg, or rump,
And gobbets wondrous to be seen, ingulf
With gape enormous.  But my fury soon
Suspending, with intreative eyes, and all
The rhetorick of looks, I crave a flask
Of venerable bencher.  Ah!  unmov'd
As cramb'd divine beholds a lazar forth
Extend his needy palm; he gorges on,
Nor ought regards my looks.  Forgive me, heaven!
I fret, I lour, I imprecate in thought,
And wreak my vengeance on the prostrate joint.

But from the conflict o'er, nor yet the rage
Of hunger half repress'd, with head on arm
Reclin'd, in pensive mood I sit, and view
Exceeding serv'd, upheaving groans full deep,
As e'er forth issued from the plaintive mouth
Of suppliant wailing for his bill dismiss'd.
Thus ALEXANDER, fam'd for conquest, whilst
The world him sovereign own'd, sat down and sigh'd
For worlds unfound to vanquish, and with ken
Invidious ey'd the moon, and wish'd it near,
Thro' glorious thirst of slaughter and uproar.

And gazing now on ruins, and the place,
Bleak desolated place!  where steam'd the beef,
And incense sav'ry up my nostrils fum'd,
Full sad I rise, and take my saunt'ring roam
Thro' lanes, thro' courts, o'er pavements, flags, and sands,
Uncertain, pond'ring, or with whom, or where
The fates, indulgent, might conduct my steps,
Or visit in pretence, to fill up chinks
With supplemental post-meridian tea.

But lo!  detach'd on horrible emprize,
Two grizly proulers temple-ward incline
Their baleful progress.  Fraught with ranc'rous guile,
Low growling stalk'd they, and around them sly
Roul'd their prey-seeking orbs.  An elvish gloom
Their aspects o'er instern'd, and on their brows
Barbarity sat louring.  On they strode,
A horrid pair!  deep pond'ring in their souls
Hell-bred extortion, fees, and ambush foul.

Horrent I spy'd the monsters, and back fled,
All frighted and astoun'd, and cry'd out CATCH-POLE!
The TEMPLE started at the hideous name,
Thro' all her chambers, and forth windows back
Resounded, CATCH-POLE!  Swift I fled; more swift
The fiends pursued, and forcible around
Embrac'd me, all dismay'd, and heaving groans,
Piteous enough to soften stubborn oak,
Or flint, or ought but adamantine heart
Of ruthless dun, or his obdur'd compeer.
And now &mdash; but lo!  assemble to my aid
Hosts numberless and dread.  As wrathful JOVE
Avengeful thunders, and the louring heavens
Burst into showers; then torrents black and foul
Roar down the sinks, and (dreadful to behold!)
Sweep grinning cats and huge tail'd rats along:
Not with less rage now rush'd, from various parts,
Clerks, footmen, shoe-boys, barbers, tritons, all
The TEMPLE posse, and with mop-sticks, oars,
Blocks, brushes, rulers, pokers, brooms and tongs
Enlarge the captive, and infuriate, pour
Perdition on the monster.  Trampled, drag'd,
And o'er belabour'd with ten thousand stripes,
O CATCH-POLE!  CATCH-POLE!  learn, ah!  learn, no more
With sole unhallow'd to prophane the TEMPLE.
As REYNARD, that oft-times in ambush lurk'd
For lamb excursive, and with tyrant heart,
To MALEPARDUS drag'd the weanling prey,
Snarls unavailing, while o'erpower'd by hosts
Latrant, he falls:  in vain the monster so
Belch'd dol'rous groans, which would, from human mouth,
Move pity, put from his, obdurate rage.
And now his soul to hell's profoundest gulf,
With kindred DAEMONS had been hurl'd; but lo!
Revolving in his breast the dire effects
Of popular commotion and uproar,
Aloof the awful minister of peace
Hung forth his flag, whereon the fates inscribed
Their doom, who, riotous in wild hubbub,
Scare peace away.  His aspect, port and wand,
(That wand somniferous, whose gentle tap
Stills clam'rous tongues, and charms ev'n rage to sleep)
Known well, and fear'd, obsequious to the sight,
With magick as inchanted, strait their wrath
Resign'd th' avengers, and desert the fray.

Mean time aghast and pallid as a feme
Way faring in the dark, whom vengeful ghost
Of horned spouse revisits, swift, with eye
Retorted oft and circumspect, I rush
To chambers, and with double valves, and bolts,
And chairs and tables, barricade the door.
Alas!  nor doors, nor chairs, nor bolts avail
'Gainst warrant of escape!  Resistless scroll!
At sight of thee portcullices, and valves,
And windows ope spontaneous; garrets, nooks,
Cellars unfold their entrails, and disgorge
Unkennell'd debtor.  And now terrors grim,
And horrid as hell-furies, burst their way,
Thund'ring thro' shatter'd doors, and, vengeful, drag
Me, bastinado'd, to black dungeon, 'clipt
LIMBO, drear mansion of insolvents, where
Groans wretchedness inchain'd, and, shudd'ring, wrapt
In tatters noisom, stares, with eyes aghast,
Her hideous train, self-writhing, wan and foul,
Throat-parching thirst, paunch-gnawing hunger, cold
Teeth-chattering, sleepless pangs, brain-racking shifts,
Heart-broke repentance, and sigh-heaving spleen.
Nor these among, outrageous, day and night
Cease ministers of dolours, goblins fell,
Abominable, inutterable, and worse
Than chaplain yet has feign'd, or nurse conceiv'd,
CATCH-POLES and TURNKEYS, and ETCAETERAS dire.

Midst horrors here endungeon'd, and with groans
And the loud clank of irons peal'd, I pass
The wailful gloom, contemplative and sad
As horse or ass in penitential pound,
For rear-arrear or trespass; and sometimes,
Deep-sighing, ruminate his joys, who dwells
In the third region of the TEMPLE, far
From gloom and durance.  Penal bonds or plaints
Of debtor lacrymable ne'er disturb
His morning slumbers; but when warbling shrill
Of chimney-sweep, or triton, usher in
The morn, he yawns, and indolent extends;
Nor waking sighs, or sickens with the qualms
Of conscience, nor the gods with pray'r molests:
But amorous thought indulges, or reflects
On COKE; or JOVE-like from above surveys
The subject globe, streams, barges, houses, trees,
Chairs, carts and hackney's, serjeants, oyster-nymphs
Promiscuous mingle; or secure from palm
Retentive of fell CATCH-POLE, hurls aloof
Defiance, unappall'd, at ruthless dun:
Or billet-doux peruses, or disports
In labyrinths of pleading or record,
Delightful mazes!  Or with formal band
And looks demure and studious, as perplex'd
With knotty points and queries, entertains
Fee-bearing client.  But when matron NIGHT
Rook-like sits brooding on the streets, and wide
Out-spreads her rev'rend night-rail, he beneath
Begirt with sword, and spruce with powder'd bobb,
Or takes an act; or forth, advent'rous, roves
To consecrated haunts of vagrant nymphs
Devote to VENUS; or at WILL'S or TOM'S,
Or other nightly rendezvous, from nod
Oracular of politician, learns
The fate of EUROPE; or with social friend
Repairs to gill, or mug-house, and regales
On chop or stake, and nectarous draught of bubb.

O BUBB transportive!  to the tuneful tribe,
Than spring PIERIAN, or cool purling brook
Of HELICON more grateful!  thee unhail'd
The muse ought not to pass, who frequent soars
By thee uprais'd aerial, and presumes
Above the flight of poetastic wing.
O gracious!  would'st thou deign thine aid and drench
My parched clarion; like MILTONIAN ape,
How would I now forth bellow in thy praise,
With mouth loud-sounding, and earth-shaking strides!
Vain invocation!  far from pauper's ken,
Incellar'd deep by froth-pot CERBERUS, nought,
Save magick STERLING, can evoke thee thence.
All-powerful STERLING!  to thy SYREN chink
Responsive, fugues AUSONIA; INDIA west
And east waft delicates remote; and forth,
In gambols, from his watry realms upstarts
LEVIATHAN; and (horrible to hear!)
Hoarse rumbles poetaster.  With thy love,
Smit with thy sacred love, how oft in vain
Sat I expectant, where the law-learn'd plead
EXCHEQUER, CHANCERY, or the ROLLS!  but chief
Thee, KING'S-BENCH!  and thy crickets oft on morns
I visited with note-book, and intent
Beheld the coifed venerables shake
Their awful wigs full-bottom'd, and contract
Their fateful brows in labour, or of quirk,
Or nice distinction, till gut-wambling noon
Advis'd adjournment, and refection meet.
Thus appetite with noon, and with the year
The terms return, but not to me return
Fee, or the grave approach of bill or brief,
Sollicitor, attorney, client, friend;
But grates instead, and ever-griping want,
And all want's offspring, (hideous even to name!
Ah!  how more hideous to be felt!) surround
Me thus enduranc'd from the joys of life.
Nor these against, or statute, or the law,
Yclipt the common, remedy prescribes.

To you, then lowly, these my plaints be maid,
To you, benevolent as grace, who pour
Indulgence on disastrous wit, and pleas'd
With tenderness paternal, stretch your hand
Promotive forth to learning, and humane,
Sooth anguish undeserv'd; on suppliant thus,
Within, without, on every side assail'd,
Cast eye redressive, and vouchsafe relief,
Such, gracious, as your wisdom meet shall judge,
And your complainant shall unwearied pray.
