TITYRUS.  MELIBOEUS.

MELIBOEUS.
While, Tityrus, no cares perplex your mind,
While thus, beneath the beechen shade reclin'd,
You blow the flute, or meditate the strain
To some fair maid of the frequented plain,
I, call'd by hatred war's tremendous roar,
Forsake my much-lov'd home, my native shore;
Its tranquil joys reluctantly forego,
For fields of slaughter, and for scenes of woe.

TITYRUS.
Sure I must call that man almost divine,
Through whom such days of calm content are mine.
At least to him I greater reverence owe
Than Romish zealots to the papal foe,
Or a saint's relics. &mdash; Oft my prayers I raise
For him, and oft proclaim my patron's praise.
When Christmas lamb upon my table smokes,
Exulting then amid my country folks,
With heartfelt joy I see my glasses crown'd
With swelling bumpers as his health goes round.
For, great the blessings I from him receive:
I smoke my pipe, nor ask another's leave:
View my own sheep on yonder mountain play,
And lowing cattle through the meadow stray.

MELIBOEUS.
I see, with wonder, not with envy, fir'd,
My friend possess those blessings I desir'd.
Ye idle thoughts!  no more my breast invade,
For thundering war I quite the noiseless shade.
I might have seen erewhile, though now too late,
The black presages of my future fate.
Signals of dire event, the comet glar'd,
And newspapers impending war declar'd.
But who thy patron?  whence the happy lot
That made thee owner of this pleasing spot?

TITYRUS.
Oft had my fancy painted to my view
(For little then of polish'd life I knew)
London's vast domes, like yonder cots, to rise
In greater number, and superior size.
Thus eyeless whelps are to their dams compar'd,
And new-fall'n calves unto the lowing herd.
But know, not more the lawn-rob'd prelate shines
In pomp superior to our Welsh divines;
Nor lofty elms surpass the creeping weeds;
Than that huge town all other towns exceeds.

MELIBOEUS.
But why to London didst thou go?

TITYRUS.
To gain
Preferment, which I long had wish'd in vain.
To live and die a journeyman divine
Is cause for liberal spirits to repine.
Yet while I Beecham serv'd, I never sought
Promotion &mdash; scarcely on a living thought.
But when to Clifton's curacy remov'd,
Far from the parish I so greatly lov'd,
The case was alter'd:  in the neighbouring town
Men shew'd their wit by sneering at the gown.
At weekly clubs my presence would provoke
E'en leaden 'squires to aim a stingless joke;
Who, deeper vers'd in Whist's mysterious game,
Sent back the Doctor poorer than he came.

MELIBOEUS.
I wonder'd much as on a holy day,
Through Beecham parish I pursu'd my way,
To hear no bell announce the wonted prayers,
And see thy flock employ'd in worldly cares,
Thee gone &mdash; the bells hung silent in the steeple,
And work or play engag'd the country people.

TITYRUS.
What could I do?  a curate to remain
By weekly toil a pittance poor to gain;
While purse proud farmers, insolently kind,
First ask'd and then proclaim'd how oft I din'd
And drank at their expence; who, plump and sleek,
Laugh'd at the tatter'd gown and sallow cheek,
Was dreadful! &mdash; Then I sought my patron's dome,
My only friend, and found that friend at home.
He listen'd to my tale, by pity sway'd.&mdash;
How small my gains, and yet how much I pray'd,
He kindly heard; then granted all my suit,
Gave me this living, and some cash to boot.

MELIBOEUS.
Thrice happy man!  whose annual tythes produce
Enough for competence, and moderate use.
Though here no stately palaces arise,
And, tipp'd with gold, no spires ascend the skies:
Though few thy neighbours, and of manners rude,
No vices taint them, and no frauds delude;
Here oft with joy you take your favourite book,
And tread the margin of the gurgling brook;
Or where the rippling waters swifter glide,
The mimic fly light floating down the tide,
The speckled trout ensnare.  At times reclin'd
Beneath yon oak you rest; while on the wind
The bee's soft murmurings sooth thee to repose,
Bees, from whose toil thy rich metheglin flows.
At home, around thee in thy spacious court
The fowl, the duck, and noisy geese resort.
From the thatch'd barn the robin pours his strain,
And turtles in the distant wood complain.

TITYRUS.
The fish that sport along yon liquid maze,
Shall sooner in the tufted valley graze;
And from the vale th' unwieldy oxen rise,
And skim like swallows through the azure skies;
Farmers shall quit roast beef and nut-brown ale,
On rich ragouts and claret to regale;
Lords shall forego French soups and foreign wine,
Shall drink with peasants, and with ploughmen dine:
Nay, greater wonders than I've mention'd yet,
Must happen, ere my patron I forget.

MELIBOEUS.
But I must go with war's ferocious bands
To Calpe's rock or Afric's burning sands;
Or where stern Winter holds his savage reign
With toilsome march through Canada's domain,
Confederate war with Christian Indians wage,
Or with Dutch Pagans in Japan engage.
'Tis mine, alas!  to roam from place to place,
To sneering captains say unheeded grace,
And words of peace to impious soldiers give;
A doctrine they by violating live.
Oh!  shall I, shall I not behold at last,
When many a long-revolving year is past,
My native land?  there in my cottage reign,
And with mild counsel guide the erring swain?
On those unbenefic'd what ills await!
Ah, how precarious is a curate's fate!
Must others reap the products of my toil?
For others did I make the garden smile,
And deck the well-rang'd beds with blooming flowers?
The sweet employment of my leisure hours!
No longer, Meliboeus, think to gain
Preferment, which thou never will obtain,
Farewell my flock!  once objects of my care,
Oft to my voice ye bent a willing ear:
With laugher hail'd the oft-repeated joke,
And heard with reverence what I gravely spoke.
Ne'er from my pulpit shall I mark, around,
The gallery with strong-voic'd singers crown'd;
Nor see the hoary farmers stand below,
Rapt with the solemn strain, in decent row:
No longer view, in Sunday's garb array'd,
The sturdy youth, and simple-minded maid.
No tinkling bells I hear, no more I preach,
Nor you perform the rules I us'd to teach!

TITYRUS.
Yet here, this night at least with me repose:
In beer or soft metheglin drown thy woes.
A barn-door fowl I shall smoke upon the board,
And brocoli my garden will afford.
Walk in &mdash; around us close the shades of night,
The noiseless bat begins his wavering flight.
The weary ploughman hastens to his home&mdash;
These signs declare that supper-time is come.
