Happy the man!  whose well-stor'd shelf contains,
In various piles, for the whole year compos'd,
A set of goodly sermons.  He nor fears
Returning Saturday, or next day's toil:
But to his closet, when the week comes round,
Gaily repairs; and, as the Seasons change,
To Christmas, Lent, or Easter, from the heap
Takes his discourse prepar'd, and, in the case
With cleanly band, laid cheek by jowl, secure,
They sleep till chiming bells the Curate call.

Whilst I, but late in orders, and immers'd
In various cares, or bus'ness through the week,
Am forc'd some ancient manuscript to patch,
Or copy fair, 'gainst Sunday's coming tide.
Delay'd till late, the wearying task demands
Double dispatch:  but, lo!  ere half 'tis done,
All unsuspected, in my careless haste,
A dreadful chasm in the leaves appears!&mdash;
The scrutinizing eye the remnant seeks,
Lost, and abandon'd in the chaos rude
Of dust-hole, when the study last was swept:
Perhaps by adverse winds, impetuous, driven
From great-coat pocket, as he cross'd the downs,
The rosy Vicar of the neighb'ring church:
Or doom'd perhaps his fragrant pipe to light,
Careless when once't had serv'd his Sunday's turn:

Alas!  its fate how useless now to mourn!
Better the hideous gap with matter fill
New and original, that all run smooth,
Nor patch'd appear, as red on garments blue.
So, to the mutilated form
Of some fair statue, of the antient school
Of Phidias, lost for ages, is restor'd
Its pristine beauty by the novel art
Of modern sculptor.&mdash;

Then, to compare, correct, and interline,
What painful labour, when the time is short!
What to adopt, and what reject, with care,
Puzzles the will:  nor more confus'd, I ween,
Nor more distracted was his choice, when stood
The simple Ass between two loads of hay.

At length 'tis done, but smear'd with many a blot,
And ill-transcrib'd on sundry wretched scraps
Of letters, on the remnant billets-doux,
Like Joseph's coat, of divers hues compos'd,
It looks, or pantomimic Harlequin's.&mdash;
Nor ends my trouble here, and dire mishap
Attends me still; for, when the pray'rs are done,
And, drest in sable stole, I cautious range
My numerous papers, on the ample space
Of velvet cushion, by dame Margery giv'n,
Or some industrious spinster of renown:
While chaunt the anthem through the echoing choir
The rustic hinds, in simplest harmony;
Lo!  envious Zephyr, through the opening door,
Darts his destructive breath:  around, above,
In eddying whirlpools tost, my papers fly,
Gone, irrecoverably gone!  and nought remains
But shame and laughter at th' astonish'd priest.

Beware, ye Curates; of such ills beware!
And learn from sad example to transcribe
In well-sew'd book, and fairest characters,
Your own or others's sermons; &mdash; then the eye
Shall run delighted o'er the page, nor fear
To stumble at the ill-corrected line,
Or stop, bewilder'd, in midway.  The tongue
Shall swell each sentence in melodious strain:
The list'ning audience give the tribute due
Of well-earn'd praise; &mdash; perhaps a higher meed
Waits your deserts, a dinner at the Squire's,
The proud descendant of those valorous Knights,
Whose arms high hang upon the trophied wall,
While sleep their ashes in the peaceful grave.

Then at the hospitable Dame's right hand,
And help'd to choicest morsels, all elate
You sit enraptur'd, and the London news
Hear aboriginal, and, ceaseless, ply
The jovial bumper, till the tinkling bell
Summons to pray'rs, and, then, disconsolate,
You trudge to pray, to bury, and baptize.
