Pity the sorrows of these ancient walls,
Now tott'ring hopeless o'er their time-worn base;
One stern command, and all their grandeur falls,
The last sad relicks of a noble race.

Ah!  who can tell the changes of his fate,
Or trace through rolling years the varying tides?
Who can disclose his ever-alt'ring state,
Or mark the streamlet, less'ning as it glides?

In rude magnificence, a massy pile,
Triumphant here its Norman banners wav'd,
A bulwark bold, array'd in antient style,
Whilst gentle Tees its strong foundations lav'd.

No harbour this for Rapine's dreadful sway,
No haughtily baron rul'd indignant here,
No trembling peasants lawless lords obey,
Or wipe in silence the neglected tear.

Here other morals find more ample room,
Tho' damp'd, alas!  by Superstition's dream;
The Gospel penetrates the deadly gloom,
And sheds abroad a more instructive gleam.

Where this small ruin lifts its humble head,
And tells the tale of desolating Time,
Their lives a race of holy Prelates led,
Whose smiles dispell'd the rigour of the clime.

Bosom'd in trees the Gothic mansion stood,
Which grateful shed a sacred gloom around;
Its battlements reflected from the flood&mdash;
Its deep-trench'd mote a sure defence was found.

Yet not for war alone these tow'rs were rais'd,
Fair peace and loyalty more joys afford;
Thro' the broad hall a thousand torches blaz'd,
The royal banquet smok'd upon the board.

Nor yet loud revelry, nor base misrule,
(Unseemly sights!) this hallow'd pile confest;
From pomp and power, Ambition's dang'rous school,
Good Farneham sought it as a place of rest.

Quick rolls the torrent down the mountain's side
When angry clouds the alter'd year deform;
Quick ages roll, destructive as the tide,
And sweep the scatter'd remnants of the storm.

Tho' far retir'd, tho' sunk in hoary years,
And tending slowly to a mild decay;
A cruel spoiler all my glory tears&mdash;
Where will not civil discord find its way?

Now strewn abroad by many an impious hand,
Forlorn, deserted my sad ruins lie,
Scarce mark the spot of honour's late command,
Scarce tell the pitying stranger where to sigh.

Yet 'midst the wrecks and ravages of Time,
Benevolence a sacred trophy rears&mdash;
Not propt on bases, sculptur'd stones sublime,
But wet with orphan's sympathetic tears.

Soft verdure crowns the undulating ground,
The shepherd's riches deck the rural shed,
Nature's first bev'rage sweetly streams around;
The infant's suckled, and the hungry fed.
