Aid me ye nine, to chaunt in tuneful strains,
A circle much renown'd yclep'd a ring;
Not that which Broughton's sons have frequent mark'd
With desp'rate brusings; neither that which oft
Surrounds a bull, when fasten'd to a stake,
The sport of Butchers, and the num'rous tribes
Of Hockley, or St. Giles's:  nor the ring
Of greater use the curtain's nearest friend:
These we pass by, and many a hundred more
Of less important use, the present strains
A nobler object boast, a theme which claims
A Smart's, a Woty's, or a Churchill's lays.
Hail, honour'd Hymen!  'tis to thee alone
This humble wreath is brought; nor spurn the gift,
Tho' sprung from pen inglorious; abler bards
Hereafter may resume the glorious task,
And weave a nobler chaplet for thy brows;
Meanwhile, let this supply the envied post
That binds thy vot'ries in a pleasing chain
Indissoluble, gladly would the muse
Attempt; but who shall ever dare describe
The blest effects of that celestial pledge,
Whose efficacious pow'r the world reveres?
Whose mystic influence bland, can so far change
The common laws of nature, as to join
Two hearts, by matrimonial rites, in one?
Delightful office!  Happy, happy Ring!
By fortune thus distinguish'd:  Thee nor hoops
Of diamonds, nor the love-inspiring wreath,
Hight bracelet, sparkling on Fidelia's hand,
Nor ring with brilliant set (tho' oft display'd
On music master's finger, oftener seen
From Q&mdash;n-Street's learned pulpit) can excel.
Thy native plainness beams the genuine worth
Of Chili's mine, more precious than the gems
Which proud Golconda boasts; or tinsel toys,
Which either India pours, when laden deep
With balmy cargoes, float the pond'rous barques
O'er seas precarious.  Thee, the matrons hail
Their legal property!  Peculiar badge
Of honourable wedlock; which, nor swains,
Nor nymphs unmarried, nor the purer maids,
Whose virgin years, and silver locks creep on
(Which wrinkled faces shew, tho' modern art
Strives to conceal) &mdash; Not one of these presume
T' invade the claim connubial. &mdash; Should distress
Involve, the wedded pair, should meager want
Stare, dreadful, should the creditor appear
To claim contracted debts; &mdash; in that sad hour,
Tho' savage catchpoles with relentless hand
Seize all things else; &mdash; this ever trusty ring,
The female calls her own, and boldly braves
The miscreant wretch to take it! &mdash; Heav'n preserve
Each happy pair from this severe distress,
From this sad trial!  From the hand of law
Severely griping! &mdash; Not in every court
A Pratt presideth; not in every bar
A Glynn harangues! &mdash; How dreadful then the thought!
Shall they, whole lives have hitherto been spent
In amity and love, be ruthless dragg'd
To feel the scourge of equitable courts,
And all the little insolence of pow'r?
Forbid it, gracious heav'n!  let happier days
Await the sacred yoke! &mdash; Let all who join
In this blest union, know and feel the truth,
That earth produces not a greater bliss,
Than those attendant on a wedded life.
