REYNO.
Now past is the wind and the rain,
The noon-day how calm, and how still!
The light cloud hovers over the plain,
And the shadow flies o'er the green hill.

The torrent, arous'd from the steep,
O'er its rough-pebbled bed loudly roars;
O'er the rock, O how dreadful the leap!
How ruffl'd it beats on its shores!

O thy murmurs, how sweet to mine ear!
As thou glid'st the glad vallies along:
But more sweet is the sound that I hear;
It is Alpin's, the son of the song.

It is Alpin's, he mourns for the dead,
His bosom he heaves with a sigh:
Right hoary with age in his head,
And the tear trickles down from his eye.

Why, Alpin, why silent, alone?
Why carols the sweet songster no more?
As a blast through the woods is thy moan,
As a wave on the lonely sea shore.

ALPIN.
O Reyno, my tears are in vain,
For the grave who a ransom shall take?
How loud, and how pow'rful, the strain,
Bids the dust dwelling tenant awake!

Tho', Reyno, thou'rt tall on the hill,
'Midst the youths of the plain none like thee;
Tho' far fam'd at the bow is thy skill,
And few years on thy face I can see;

Yet Reyno like Morar shall fall,
On his grave the sad mourner shall weep,
His bow lye unstrung in the hall,
And forgotten the place of his sleep.

Thou, Morar, wert swift in the race,
Not the roe on the mountains so fleet,
O'er the sands who thy footsteps could trace?
The dews were unhurt with thy feet.

As a storm marks with ruin its way,
With thine arm thou confoundest the field;
Thy sword was as lightning by day,
As a meteor at night was thy shield.

Thy voice like a stream after rain;
Like thunder remote was thine ire;
By thine arm many mighty were slain,
Thy wrath was consuming as fire.

But when thou return'st from the fight,
How calm, and how peaceful, wert thou!
As the sun after rain is more bright,
So more calm and serene was thy brow.

So unruffled's the shade on the deep,
When the moon her lone journey doth take;
When, hush'd, the loud winds are asleep,
So calm is the breast of the lake.

O Morar, so mighty before,
Here how small thy resemblance is found!
Four stones with green moss cover'd o'er,
With three steps I encompass them round.

A tree stands alone on the heath,
Scarce a leaf the tir'd hunter can spy;
Untrod grows the grass underneath,
And the wind whistles mournfully by.

A tree stands alone on the heath,
Scarce a leaf the tir'd hunter can spy;
Untrod grows the grass underneath,
And the wind whistles mournfully by.

Here, Morar, indeed thou art low,
No mother thy fate to deplore,
No maid with her breast full of woe,
The daughter of Morglan's no more!

Who is he on his staff that appears?
Who trembles each step that he takes?
Low he stoops with the weight of his years;
And slow is the pace that he makes:

Whose hairs are more white than the snow,
That is wreath'd in the sharp northern air;
With tears his red eyes overflow,
And his face is deep mark'd with despair.

It's thy father, O Morar, it's he,
In battle he heard of thy fame:
Of none he's the father but thee,
And to meet the lov'd conqu'ror he came.

Of thy fame in the battle he heard,
And of foes that were scatter'd around,
And much from thy valour he fear'd:
But he heard not, alas!  of thy wound.

Thou, father of Morar, may'st weep,
For no more shall he watch the grey dawn;
At thy voice no more start from his sleep,
To meet the young morn on the lawn;

For long is the rest he shall have,
His pillow how lowly it lies!
O when will't be morn in the grave,
To bid the soft slumberer rise?

Then farewel, thou bravest of men!
Tho' no more thou art seen in the field,
Thy voice no more heard in the glen,
Tho' no more the bright sword thou shalt wield,

Tho' no son follows after thy bier,
Thy much-lov'd memorial to keep,
No daughter with many a tear,
O'er thy grave her sad losses to weep;

Yet the song shall preserve thee a name,
Thy mem'ry shall ever be dear;
E'en the bard shall partake of thy fame,
Future ages of Morar shall hear.
