Wrapt in the shade where meditation lies,
And holds a mental intercourse above;
Come, truth, and teach a bosom to be wise,
Which mourn'd too long for disappointed love.

What art thou &mdash; wond'rous impulse of desire,
Which blooming hope so pleasingly has drest?
Or whence proceeds th' involuntary fire,
Which burns so fiercely in the human breast?

Sweet inconsistent off-spring of the sky,
The latent cause in tenderness declare;
Nor force the heart eternally to sigh,
And yet conceal the motive of despair.

If Mira's face in every charm is drest,
Why am I doom'd incessantly to pine?
Or shall the coldness of another's breast,
Create his sharp anxiety in mine?

Alas!  since Being smil'd upon the morn,
And nature saw how excellent it rose;
Thy race, O man, to misery was born,
And doom'd to bear probationary woes.

Too easy nature, indolently kind,
From fate's severe restrictions to depart,
Gave man a passive tenderness of mind,
And beauty's sole dominion of the heart.

But yet the pang of never-hoping love,
To time's last moment destin'd to conceal;
Is not the only sorrow we must prove,
The only sorrow we are doom'd to feel.

A latent train of hydra-headed woes,
From life each dearer benefit have stole;
Destroy'd the smallest glimmer of repose,
And damp'd the choicest blessing of the soul.

Perhaps e'en now, some high distinguish'd name,
Rais'd up to grandeur, and enrich'd by place;
Starts from some new imaginary shame,
Or only slumbers to a fresh disgrace.

Perhaps, now tortur'd on imperial down,
Some scepter'd mourner languishes his hour;
And sinks beneath the burthen of a crown,
The slave of greatness, and the wretch of pow'r.

Some ill-star'd youth, whose melancholy moan,
Has vainly sounded in unpitying ears;
Now weeps, perhaps, in bitterness alone,
And gives a lavish freedom to his tears.

Science, which left him polish'd and refin'd,
Has giv'n a new occasion to complain;
And knowledge only has enlarg'd his mind,
To make it more susceptible of pain.

No hand, alas!  its kind assistance lends,
To drive misfortune from his lowly door;
For when, O when, did wretchedness make friends!
Or who will seek acquaintance with the poor!

Perhaps some virgin is this moment led,
All sicklied over with dejected charms,
Compell'd to languish in a hated bed,
And seem'd quite happy in detested arms.

Wedded to anguish and repining care,
Yet bound to wear no sorrow in her eye;
And tho' condemn'd for ever to despair,
Deny'd the humble privilege to sigh.

How dread a picture meditation brings
Of life's unceasing wretchedness below!
Where the long chain and ordinance of things
Appear so fraught with misery and woe.

Yet rest, my soul, submissively, O rest,
Nor think that virtue has been treated hard;
This world was made to prove it in the breast,
And not alone intended to reward.

The great first cause, all-gracious, has design'd,
His endless transports for a world of bliss,
To crown a moral rectitude of mind,
And bless obedient righteousness in this.

Whatever ills in this uncertain state,
Lamenting man may frequently have known;
Spring from no wish or negligence of fate,
But some unhappy error of his own.

Then, all resign'd, O let him pour his heart!
And kiss the sharp, but salutary rod!
Nor, tho' condemn'd in bitterness to smart,
Presume to throw the blame upon his God.
