Thrice happy he, whose body is adorn'd
With glossy broad cloth shap'd to fashion's taste;
He can undaunted stalk among the croud
Of petit maitres, gay coquettes and beaux:
Or, if he chuse, perambulate the groves
Where lovers stray; or mix the airy throng
Of gay gallants who flutter in the park;
Nor fear the sneers which poverty excites.
He may to balls or gay assemblies go,
Where ev'ry eye approves his taste for dress;
And the silly empty things he says
Are deem'd sound judgment, or the brightest wit.
While I, the slave of poverty accurs'd,
Detested poverty!  the poet's plague,
The scorn of opulence, and jest of pride!
With coat thread-bare, and at the elbows worn,
Must lonely moping in my garret sit,
Writing envenom'd lines 'gainst adverse fate,
Which, in some damn'd or ill-omen'd hour,
Doom'd me the slave of misery and want.
Or (O most shocking to the feeling mind!)
If sharp necessity should call me forth,
Must take by-roads, or filthy lanes obscure,
To hide my wretchedness from grandeur's view:
For if I dare attempt the crouded street,
Prosperity askance oft rolls her eye,
And shuns my company with dire contempt.
Hence the warm blush that crimson's o'er my face,
And speaks the pungent feelings of my soul.

But that the dread of that infernal scroll,
By crafty taylors fill'd with items dire
Of buckram, binding, twist, mohair, and all
The curs'd equipments of a suit of cloaths,
Affrights my soul, and to my fancy paints
The hated yawnings of a prison-door,
I'd get genteelly dress'd, and strut about
With all the insolence of conscious wealth.

That dreaded sight with fear I once beheld.&mdash;
One night, as musing in my room I sat,
And built huge castles in the empty air,
An horrid spectre to my view appear'd!
The frightful carcase was mere skin and bone:
In dress compos'd of rags of diff'rent hue,
Which erst were purloin'd from the suits of beaux,
The lank visage bore famine in its looks:
Loose ragged locks adown its shoulders hung,
And round the neck were shreds of parchment plac'd,
That once contained deeds of good account.
In the lean hand, which misery had worn
To perfect sinews and clay-colour'd skin,
A scroll portentous to my view it held.

Rueful, aghast, I view'd the terror o'er!
Mine eyes stood motionless within their orbs;
My feeble fingers dropt the powder'd herb,
And my whole frame felt pangs unknown before;
When thus the dread horrific phantom spoke:

"The bill I hold, Sir, has too long been due,
And must be paid this instant, else the law
Shall force you to discharge the debt you owe."
Then did the fiend with impudence assert,
That scoundrel taylors had a right to eat!

The bill I seiz'd, and gave the pest his due,
Who in an instant vanish'd from my sight:
(May such a sight ne'er shock poor poet's eye!)
My empty stomach felt the dire effects
Of my poor pocket's dismal desolation,
And taught me soon how sharp a curse it was
To feel the gnawings of a hungry heart.

Rather than meet such horrid sight again,
Or feel the agonies I then endur'd,
I'll wear the dusty remnant of a coat,
Till piecemeal from my meagre shape it drops.

Then let me try, by industry or art,
To gain a competence (my utmost wish!)
Get dress'd once more, as oft I us'd to be,
When hoodwink'd fortune led me by the hand,
And quite forgot my poverty and pain.
If then I fail, with honour let me fall!

Thus some brave general, by foes hemm'd in,
And almost famish'd by a ling'ring siege,
Resolves &mdash; rather than with harsh terms comply,
To meet the storm, beat back his foes, nor die!
