Where rolls the silver Thames in pompous pride,
Whose lordly billows lash each sturdy side;
Where thro' the gay extended prospect's seen
A mead by Flora deck'd in vivid green;
While woodbines, hyacinths, and violets yield
Their fragrant odours to perfume the field;
Where with the nodding bows soft zephyrs play,
And the blithe linnet warbles on the spray.

Amanda here, in all the pomp of woe,
Loose o'er her limbs the sable vestures flow;
Her charming hair dishevell'd now bedeck,
And hang in auburn ringlets o'er her neck:
Hither she came, impell'd by black despair;
From her bright eyes distill'd the chrystal tear;
Those laughter-looking eyes now sadly weep,
A stranger to the joys of balmy sleep;
No peace, no comfort can her bosom find,
Vain the attempt to soothe her troubled mind:
She three times sigh'd, and thrice she smote her breast,
"Was it for this," she cry'd, with suppliant face,
"I pay'd my daily homage to her grace?
Alas!  too easy, unsuspecting maid!
Thy ductile kindness is but ill repaid:
Has my once pleasing face lost every charm?
This face, which once all bosoms did alarm?
The sight of which made Caelia full of spite,
T' expire with envy on her wedding night:
Have I too lost my happy shape and air,
Which drew at court the universal stare?
Or was I flatter'd when they said my eyes
Caus'd those emotions, those repeated sighs?
Fool that I was to trust what men will say,
'Who praise to ruin, flatter to betray.'

"Why to my eyes appear this varied scene?
The spacious meadows' necromantic green,
The bow'r, the lawn, the wood, the fertile field,
To me no beams of heav'nly comfort yield;
Rather let barren horrors smite the ground,
And desolation reign supreme around,
Level'd in ruins to its lowly bed,
No more let yonder fabric raise its head,
For ever rid from th' admiring sight,
Fit habitation for the birds of night!
Let, unmolested, in the open day
The prowling wolf securely seize its prey;
Pale terror on weak superstition fall,
With the ill-omen'd screech owl's dismal squall;
Blow, blow ye winds, in hollow murmurs roar,
And you, ye waters, overflow the shore
In innundations, suited to my mind,
With sad destruction overwhelm mankind;
May deadly venom creep into the blood,
And blights and mildews blast the tender bud;
Let pestilence put on its sable robe,
And solemn peals of thunder shake the globe;
With horror let the forked lightning fly,
And everlasting night o'erspread the sky;
All, all be famine, death, and misery,
For I am BLACKBALL'D by the COTERIE!"
