Yon paly moon now reigning in the sky,
Athwart the grove reflects a silver ray;
O'er all the scene the vernal blessings fly,
And sinks the twilight of the eve away:
Ah!  here inspir'd by silence and the muse,
My sadly tortur'd soul her sorrows shall diffuse.

Yes &mdash; now the night her sable pomp displays,
And where the streamlet gently flows along,
Which, murm'ring seems 'mongst pebbles as it strays,
To catch the soft contagion of my song,
I, led to each enraptur'd joy, repair,
T' indulge the fate's decrees with sorrow and despair.

Thou phantom, Hope!  thou shadow of a shade!
Joy of my life when Chloe was at hand;
How has thy art my confidence betray'd,
And left me weeping in my native land!
Whilst she, the fairest of the virgin train,
Is gone, for ever gone, nor contemplates my pain.

Thrice happy land, that own'st her gentle sway!
From friendly converse, and from me how far!
How do I grudge you the benignant ray,
That beams from eyes as brilliant as a star!
O nymph!  in pity to its honour'd swains,
Attempt not e'er to shine unclouded on its plains.

Thy beauteous face my fond ideas bring,
And fancy cherishes an inward storm:
Forlorn and friendless oft thy praise I sing,
And grasp extatic at an empty form;
'Till each delusion vanishes from sight,
And leaves, as now, my soul to solitude and night.

Full oft reflect I, when absorb'd in woe,
On that unfriendly melancholy day,
Which gently bade my fair one go
To filial love, and pleasure's sparkling ray;
Which robb'd my soul of all it counted dear,
Nor left on spark of peace, one gleam of hope sincere.

Ah!  me, what anguish did surround this heart,
(A faint resemblance of what now I feel)
When, with "adieu," I strove with her to part
Nor thought my woes my passion should reveal:
Now, like yon hapless linnet in the grove,
I mourn, and fruitless mourn, the absence of my love.

Hark!  how the neigh'bring thrush attunes his throat,
Alarm'd, or jealous of malignant foes;
Whom balmy zephyrs, on the air that float,
Had lately hush'd to silence and repose.
Ah!  cease thy lovely strain &mdash; no vot'ry thou,
To sorrow's baleful gloom, or visionary woe.

Ah!  charming warbler!  who, so void of art,
Canst sweetly twitter sorrows round the heath;
Whose tuneful accents join my aching heart,
And sooth the suff'rings that surround my path;
Thy plaintive murmurs ev'ry eve I'll join,
For all my tender throbs are more than trebly thine.
