And shall the muse, so studious to declare
Its power in humble verse, or rustic song,
Forget that now the tributary tear
Should flow where merit, and where praise belong?
Ah, no!  the bosom fraught with beauty's fire,
Shall change to mournful song the animated lyre.

Where native sweetness and its charms prevail,
Where beauty smiles beyond the reach of art,
The muse shall dare to sing, tho' what avail,
If gloomy sorrows pierce the feeling heart?
'Twere vain in pensive numbers to deplore,
Since beauty's pow'r is fled, and sweetness charms no more.

Yet still, whate'er was form'd to give delight,
To captivate the will, or charm the sense,
Cast in the fairest mould, did there unite,
And all the heart-felt joys of love dispense:
On whose soft notes my ravish'd ear has hung,
And bless'd the melting sweetness falling from her tongue.

Not Philomela's soft melodious strains
Sound half so sweet, when thro' the twilight grove,
The pensive warbler to the moon complains,
And tells her melancholy tale of love;
Alas!  no tuneful warblings can inspire,
No voice like her's can charm and kindle fond desire.

Not the fair lark amid the rising morn,
Proclaims the beauties of the opening day,
With so much sweetness, whilst gay flow'rs adorn
Th' empurpl'd mead, and all around is May:
For ev'n 'midst spring's gay charms, the feather'd throng
Must quit their warbling notes, and yield to Sylvia's song.

E'en the sweet linnet on the blooming spray,
Attempts in vain its power to declare,
Dull are its notes, and dull its warbling lay,
While love and Sylvia entertain the ear:
Alas!  'twere vain for merit to aspire,
For charms unrivall'd still, here set the heart on fire.

Yet what avails it that th' exub'rant tear,
The heart-felt sigh, the tributary verse,
Should thus employ a long, a fruitless care,
And strive the charms of beauty to rehearse;
When Absence, cruel pow'r, no pray'rs can move,
No tears can soften, nor the gentle voice of love!

Adieu, ye shades!  and you, ye flow'ry plains!
Who oft have witness'd to my tender vows!
Adieu!  since here no more melodious strains,
Shall charm the sense, and lull to soft repose.
Adieu!  since beauty's fled, and Sylvia's gone;
Love's fairest queen is gone, ah!  never to return!

For ah!  what now to me are flow'ry fields,
The spring's gay verdure, or the shady grove,
Or all the beauties which kind nature yields,
Depriv'd and destitute of her I love?
To this pall'd sense no pleasure can remain,
For flow'ry fields and shades can but increase my pain.

Thankless to me is Philomela's voice,
The lark's shrill mattins, or the linnet's lay;
Thankless!  for why need they again rejoice,
And I in sorrows waste the live-long day?
Ah, no!  the purling streams and flow'ry lawn,
Shall but re-echo back my solitary moan.

Oh!  would some fond, indulgent muse, but give
Its kind attention to a vot'ry's pray'r!
In never-dying verse her charms should live,
And future ages bless the friendly tear,
That flow'd where love and beauty bore a part,
And Absence, cruel Absence, pierc'd the bleeding heart.
