Let others sing of Battle's loud alarms,
Of conqu'ring heroes and defeated bands;
The task is mine, in more delightful strains
To sing a British Apple Dumpling's praise.
The lovely object opens to my view,
And on the more enraptur'd appetite
Excites a keener relish; Fancy's eye
Survey's thy charms delighted, then with speed
She wings her mystic flight thro' distant climes,
Surveys the torrid zone, Pomona's grove,
Where fragrant apples scent the ambient air,
Or hang exuberant on the loaded bow,
T' enrich my theme and charm each ravish'd scene.
Return my vagrant muse, Sumatra's fruit
We court not, Britain's fertile isle brings forth
The mellow apple:  various kinds she boasts,
Their names and virtues we must leave unsung,
These but in part thy fabric do compose.
Both Indies must unite their sweets, combine
Their choicest sweets our senses to regale.
The epicure, who each returning day,
With jaws rapacious and insatiate maw,
Devours potatoes, and unwholesome pork,
His grosser taste knows not the sweets of thee.
What tho' long time involved in sable pot,
Thou sott'ring dost endure convulsive throws?
Th' excruciating torture but refines
Thy purer essence grateful to the taste.
When from the reeking cavern's mouth thou'rt brought,
Short respite we allow thee, now with speed
Thou'rt plac'd conspicuous in a china vase
(Or sometimes dost descend to humbler delf,)
Whilst round thy polish'd sides redundant flows,
Nectareous juice in most delicious floods.
Oft times I've seen thee, (charming to relate)
Ride buoyant on the stream with head erect,
And honest front, float round the dish audacious;
But when thou boast'st a more gigantic size,
Enormous, massy, ample, long and huge,
The balmy current yields, the incumbent weight
Prepond'rates, and thou plum'st the spicy tide.
Now the quintessence of thy charms we taste
That baffles all description; numbers fail.
My languid muse resigns the arduous task,
Unable to recite what taste alone enjoys.
Let future bards enamour'd with my theme,
Improve my song, and echo forth thy praise.
