When now the Stars began to hide their Heads,
And leud Debauches sought Polluted Beds,
When nodding Watchmen left their tiresome Post,
And noisy Pomp in peaceful Sleep was lost,
Damon, a hapless Youth, whom Beauty fir'd,
And sacred Friendship's brighter Flame inspir'd,
In mournful Lays bewail'd his absent Fair,
And for his Friend confess'd an equal Care:
While, from the neighbouring Street, in shriller Cries,
To his sad Song, a Chimney-Sweep replies:
The Chimney-Sweep, in sable Pomp array'd,
As if, like him, he mourn'd the absent Maid.
While thus the Youth &mdash; Now Sol restores the Day,
And gilded Signs reflect the Orient Ray;
But ah!  to me the rising Sun supplies
No Light in Absence of my Caelia's Eyes!
Those sparkling Eyes, that did out-shine by far
The radiant Diamond pendant in her Ear,
Spend all their Fire unseen, and unadmir'd,
In Country Wastes, and lonely Vales retir'd,
While all despairing, comfortless I lie,
Can taste no Pleasure, and can find no Joy.

No more, returning from the gaudy Court,
Bless'd with her Sight, the Tavern I resort,
To meditate the lightning of her Eye,
Or quench the Flame in gen'rous Burgundy.
For since she's fled, alas!  what Toast can join
Life, Warmth, and Lustre to the flatten'd Wine.

No fashionable Dress can charm my Sight,
Nor Musick, ev'n Dubourg's, my Ear invite.
O mourn, Dubourg!  no more the crouded House
Shall fill thy Purse, and all thy Musick rouze:
She's gone, she whom alone we flock'd to see,
Intent to Love, and deaf to Harmony.
She's gone &mdash; And now coquetting Phillis shines,
Like Phaebe when the golden Sun declines.
Let Cynthia now a thousand Captives bring,
And Cloe boast her Conquests at the Ring;
Since she who from contending Beauties won
Each Lover's Heart, is now for ever gone.
She's gone &mdash; Ah dreadful Sound! &mdash; Ah Tale full sore!
Rather were Cities, Courts, and Plays no more.
Rather the Green, the Park, the Strand were fled;
And courtly Vsits never more be paid:
For what are Courts, or Plays when she's not there?
The Green, the Park, the Strand encrease our Care:
The sad Remembrance of what once they were.

O Caelia!  cruel Caelia, thus to leave
A thousand sprightly Beaus, to sigh and grieve;
To fly from wretched Damon, most unkind,
Nor leave one slender Proof of Love behind.

But ah!  unhappy Damon, witless Swain,
In vain you love, unpity'd you complain;
Some happier Youth, some Beau of matchless Size,
With active Gambol, charm'd her wand'ring Eyes;
With smart Ramilia Wig her Heart he gain'd,
And val'rous Tales of saucy Porters can'd.
To him her parting Kisses did belong,
To him the softest Accents of her Tongue;
To him the nicely-furling Fan she gave;
And he, perhaps, (O happy Fop,) has Leave,
In witless Lines, (such Lines become a Beau,)
To write what's what, and tell her who loves who.

Curs'd be his Charms, and curs'd the fatal Plains,
That from my longing Eyes my Love detains:
Curs'd be the Fields &mdash; But, ah!  where-e'er she goes
Let Pomps arise, and crowd the Scene with Beaus.
May every Cart a gilded Chariot seem&mdash;
And Plays, and Balls, in her pleas'd Fancy swim.
From Cans uncouth, let shapely Tea-Pots rise,
And ev'ry Hound be chang'd to Thavy's Size.
But, ah!  return, return, relenting Fair,
Be touch'd with Pity, hear a Lover's Pray'r;
Then shall proud Cloe quit her high Disdain,
And Phillis ogle from the Box in vain.
For thee the sighing Swains shall Altars raise;
For thee malicious Poets learn to praise.
A thousand weeping Secrets thou shalt hear,
A thousand Whispers crowd into the Ear.
Oh!  hadst thou known what horrid Things are said
Of Chloris, and what naughty Tricks were play'd,
You'd surely come &mdash;But if in vain we sue;
If we no more these heavenly Charms shall view,
Damon must bid the empty World adieu.
Thus sung the Swain &mdash; To Friendship next he turn'd
His tuneful Voice, and absent Thyrsis mourn'd.

But now the busy Town from Slumber rose,
And various Tasks, a various Noise compose.
Exclaiming Duns attend the great Man's Door,
And watchful Bailiffs terrify the Poor.
Here lab'ring Hackneys trudge for doubtful Pay,
While roaring Bullies swear their Bread away.
Unheeded Bells in empty Churches rung,
While gaping Multitudes attentive hung
Upon the Ballad Singer's tuneful Tongue:
The growing Murmur drown'd the Shepherd's Song,
Else might his Numbers be as much too long,
Too tedious, and too troublesome to thee,
As my dear Thyrsis' Absence is to me.&mdash;
