CORYDON.
Ho!  friend Alexis, whether do you tend?

ALEXIS.
Unto the town my painful steps I bend:
Again I'm forc'd to sheathe my limbs in arms,
And toil in fighting fields, 'midst dire alarms;
To distant shores unwillingly I roam,
And sorrowing leave my friends and rural home.

CORYDON.
Ah!  hapless swain!  and is the report true
That you must bid your pleasing fields adieu?
Now hither turn, and taste our homely fare,
And for a while dispel corroding care;
The ground shall here our rural table make,
And for ripe fruits myself the trees will shake,
To quench our thirst we from the bubbling spring
The crystal water in this bowl can bring.
See now the ev'ning shades their mantle spread,
And o'er the mountains form a dusky shade:
In cheerful talk we'll gladsome spend the night,
And rosy morn shall guide you with her light.

ALEXIS.
Kind neighbour, as you ask, I will obey;
Your cheerful welcome shall prolong my stay,
While ev'ning shadows flying pass along,
Till morning's usher'd by the warbling throng.

CORYDON.
With joy, my ancient friend I now detain,
But long, alas!  you cannot here remain.
Your country's cause draws you to hostile fields,
Where shine bright swords, and flame the moony shields;
What brazen trumpets loud resound from far,
And urge contending armies to the war.
Then native honour fires the noble mind;
Each breast commits its terrors to the wind.
The thought recalls my former youthful days,
When in the fields I eager fought for praise:
The Gallic warriours groan'd beneath our might;
The heavy Germans turn'd their backs to flight;
We stood terrific on the empurpled plain,
And rivers roll'd the bodies to the main.
With honour crown'd, I sought the peaceful grove:
Now through my flocks at ease I careless rove;
And piping on my reed all pleasure have
That earth can give, or that my wishes crave.

ALEXIS.
Ah!  Corydon, in peace your days on glide,
And roll in gentle murmurs through the tide.
For warlike noise the piping reed you sound;
For hostile legions stand your sheep around;
For waving ensigns spread the leafy trees;
For blackening bands appear the humming bees;
Nor hides your fields the bloom empurpled stream:
Here flows the wave that courts the silent dream!
Hark how to sleep invites the water-fall!
To rest from heat your bushy arbours call.
At night your cottage yields a safe retreat:
Near to the blazing fire you draw your seat;
And country cates afford a mild repast;
Then on your couch your weary limbs you cast;
Nor fear of danger fills your settled mind;
You give all care and terror to the wind.

CORYDON.
The love of honour fires the warriour's breast;
For this he toils, and sacrifices rest.
He wars not for himself, but for his own,
His country's safety, and his monarch's throne!
Inspir'd by this he bears aloft the shield,
And boldly rushes to the fighting field.
On heaps of slaughter'd foes the victor treads,
And wide destruction all around him spreads.
With pompous wreaths see him returning crown'd!
Hark how his praise the neighb'ring hills resound!

ALEXIS.
The shepherd swain enjoys inglorious ease;
He courts the Muses, and resounds their praise.
His flocks he leads unto the winding vale,
While ruddy morning breathes the cooling gale;
While sultry heat the parched ground invades,
He leads them to the wood's protecting shades:
Along the margin lies the crystal pool,
Their thirst to quench, and burning sides to cool:
Reclin'd at ease he views their sportful play,
And ends his labour with receding day.
In innocence he lives, fears no alarms,
Nor hears the brazen trumpet sound to arms.
Remov'd from courts, he knows not of deceit;
Unus'd to cringe and bow before the great:
He one thing thinks, nor does another tell,
And hates a liar as the gates of hell.

CORYDON.
What various ills from horrid war arise!
The field is forag'd, and in ruin lies;
The peaceful village blazes in a flame;
Our fathers, sons, and ev'ry tender name,
Behold them welt'ring in their reeking gore!
Their eyes they close in death, and open them no more!
War sweeps the grazing cattle from the fields,
And carries off the fruit rich Ceres yields;
Nor ought remains but fire and sword invades;
Our much lov'd solitudes, and woodland shades
In cloudy columns roll into the skies,
And all that yielded joy for ever flies!
But see the dew its noxious damp extends,
And down the western skies the sun descends;
From the blue mountains rushes down the night,
And evening Cynthia hides her silver light;
The nightingale complains from yonder grove,
And warbles out her tale of slighted love
Nor more in open fields must we remain;
See gath'ring o'er our heads the impending rain!
To shady coverts flock the frighted sheep;
The sounding forests murmur to the deep:
The fainting steers now homeward bear the yoke,
And from my cot ascends the curling smoke;
There while the shades obscure the gloomy sky,
In peaceful slumbers on our beds we'll lie,
And when Aurora purples o'er the east,
We'll break from slumber, and from gentle rest,
And then we'll part:  you to th' embattled plain,
I to my sheep, a simple shepherd swain!
