THYRSIS, AMYNTAS, MICON.

THYRSIS.
Unkindly leaving the delightful Plains,
The Buxom Maidens, and the sportive Swains;
Why sits AMYNTAS in this lonely Shade,
For gloomy Thought, and dull Retirement made?
What means this clouded Brow, this down-cast Eye?
Why does thy Pipe thus un-regarded Lie?
That jolly Pipe, which, manag'd by thy Art,
Ne'er fails to win a beauteous Virgin's Heart;
While Rival Shepherds, by thy Skill out-done,
Their own hard Fate in thy Success bemoan.
Come, Happy Youth!  The Nymphs expecting stay,
Without thy Presence there can be no May,
For all refuse to Dance, unless AMYNTAS Play.

AMYNTAS.
When Spring full-blown, with all Her gay Delights,
The laughing Couples to the Green invites;
Where jocund Song and nimble Dance go round,
What Place, Alas!  is for the Wretched found?
No sprightly Note from me expect to hear,
But sounds of Grief, ungrateful to thy Ear;
Then urge not, THYRSIS, an afflicted Swain,
To sing his Sorrows in a mournful Strain.

THYRSIS.
What mighty Loss, young Shepherd, what Disgrace,
Speaks in that piteous Tone, that dismal Face?
Does some mishap thy Fav'rite Ewe betide,
To the twin younglings by her Side?
Does PHYLLIS frown, or has the Eastern Wind
Blighted the Roses for her Hair design'd?
Or if less Evils can procure thy Woe,
And from small Cause these sad complainings flow;
Has some new Love, some Wonder, Chast and Fair,
Pierc'd thy fond Heart, and left Thee to despair?

AMYNTAS.
Thy childish Wit, this ill-tim'd Mirth refrain,
Nor add thy Follies to increase my Pain;
Go vent thy Jests, and make thy aukward Sport,
Where noisie Girls, and senseless Clowns resort;
Where Trifles please, some idle Tale rehearse,
Or raise loud Laughter by thy wanton Verse.
Not one grave Lesson hast Thou ever sung,
No serious Word did e'er escape thy Tongue.

THYRSIS.
Insulting Swain!  Thus let thy Skill be shown;
My Songs deride not, but correct thy Own;
Nor think, because thy Pipe the Prize obtain'd,
When I and DAPHNIS, the mean Strife disdain?
Thou, unchastiz'd, shalt thy own Umpire sit!
No &mdash; Thou shalt sing, t' expose thy want of Wit.

AMYNTAS.
'Tis wisely said &mdash; "A Fool will not be taught,
His late Experience must be dearly bought;"
And since th' Event may thy Behaviour mend,
For once, the Thrush and chatt'ring Pye contend.

THYRSIS.
Thy Words suit well with thy accustom'd Pride;
But, where the Proverb is with Truth apply'd,
Let MICON judge, and know thou shalt not long
Enjoy thy Dreams. &mdash; Begin thy Boasted Song.

AMYNTAS.
I sing NEAERA, the disdainful Fair,
A Love-sick Shepherd, and his endless Care;
Ye Western Gales, with soft complaining, blow;
Ye gliding Streams, in murm'ring Consort, flow.

How blest my State!  When with the dawning Light,
Refresh'd by Slumbers of a peaceful Night,
My little Flock I to the Plain did guide;
(My Faithful Dog attending by my Side.)
There, as they, roving, cull'd their springing Food,
My watchful Eye their wand'ring Steps pursu'd;
Sometimes a Song employ'd my tuneful Voice,
My mellow Pipe anon my various Choice;
And while sweet Sounds my skilful Touch obey'd,
The frolick Lambs their wanton Gambols play'd
Thus, with Content, I pass'd the cheerful Day;
And, when the Sun withdrew his kindly Ray,
My bleating Ewes conducted to the Fold,
And hous'd their Young, secure from Midnight Cold;
To PHILLIS then some Rural Strain addrest;
She, sweetly smiling, her Delight confest.

Ah!  wretched Youth &mdash; where is thy Fancy led;
Thy Grief is present, and thy Joys are fled?

The lovely Maid for whom I sigh in vain,
Now spreads her Glories thro' th' admiring Plain;
Resistless Beauties in her Face combine,
In ev'ry Part resistless Graces shine;
And all, by turns, engage the ravish'd Sight,
With equal Wonder, and with new Delight.
So when the op'ning Spring her Treasure yields,
And Nature's Gifts enrich the smiling Fields;
The Curious Eye the vary'd Scene survey,
And still new Joy the greateful Search repays;
Here the Carnation by the Lilly grows,
There the gay Tulip and the blushing Rose;
Pinks mixt with Cowslips raise their tender Heads,
And Purple Violets run along the Meads.

Lost in Amaze, the Fair I trembling view,
And pleasing Ruin in her Eyes pursue;
Then, bolder grown, I seek the beauteous Prize;
For He deserves his Fate, who silent Dies.
In tuneful Numbers, I confess my Flame,
And grace my Song with bright Neaera's Name;
With Tears and Sighs I join the am'rous Tale:
Ah, Cruel Maid!  Nor sighs nor Tears prevail!
My ardent Vows she hears with cold Disdain,
Laughs at my Suff'ring, and derides my Pain.
Yet fairest Maids the strongest Passions prove,
And Beauty ever was a Friend to Love.
Some happier Shepherd, of her Heart possest,
Finds sweet Repose on her relenting Breast.
Tormenting Thought! &mdash; Who can the Grief express,
When a lov'd Mistress does a Rival bless?

THYRSIS.
I sing LYCORIS, the inconstant Fair,
Who kindly eas'd me of a Lover's Care;
Ye Winds at once from ev'ry Quarter blow,
Ye wanton Streams, with endless Windings, flow.

A Slave to Love, and bright LYCORIS Eyes,
I yield my Heart her conqu'ring Beauty's  Prize;
My Joy, my Grief, depended on her Breath;
A Smile transported, and a Frown was Death.
No more the Swains with rural Pastime please,
Her Presence only can afford me ease;
A diff'rent Garb my Looks and Actions wear;
My Words I frame to sooth a Maiden's Ear;
Try ev'ry Art that may Compassion move,
And trace, unweary'd, the soft Paths of Love.
T' adorn her Head I flow'ry Wreaths prepare,
And mix gay Pansies with her shining Hair.
To please her Taste, I rob the painful Bee,
And golden Fruit pluck from the bending Tree.
Medlers full-ripe, thro' all the Woods I seek,
And ruddy Wildings, blushing like her Cheek.
When, flying Mid-day Sun's ungentle heat,
Some friendly Shade we make our cool Retreat;
In Songs of soft Complaint my Voice I raise;
The Ecchoing Grove resounds the melting Lays,
While jolly Throstles stretch their tuneful Throats,
And warbling Linnets join their softer Notes.
Sometimes the willing Fair I fondly led,
Where in green Meads my fleecy Charge I fed.
See lovely Nymph!  This little Flock is mine;
Smile on the Shepherd, and the Sheep are thine.
THYRSIS, She cry'd, thy Flock wou'd tempt in vain,
Did not some stronger Pow'r thy Cause maintain;
If viewing these I any Pleasure take,
My Blushes own 'tis for their Master's Sake;
Be constant, THYRSIS, nor deceive a Maid,
Thy winning Arts have to Love's Snare betray'd.
With suddain Joy, I snatcht her to my Breast,
And thus the Transport of my Soul exprest.
When Youth and Beauty, Innocence and Love,
Invite his stay, where shou'd the Shepherd rove?
Thro' flow'ry Vales, while Rivers Sea-ward tend,
While, toss'd by Winds, the crackling Flames ascend;
While thirsty Herds refreshing Streams pursue,
So long, LYCORIS, will thy Swain be True.
Sweetly confus'd, she rais'd her bending Head,
And in soft Accents, thus my Vows repaid.
While cheerful Day succeeds the gloomy Night,
And rising Larks salute the Morning Light;
While Nightingales frequent the shady Grove,
Will blest LYCORIS her true THYRSIS Love.

And now my Song, let youthful Swains attend,
And taught by me, on Female Vows depend.
MOERIS, whose Flock the spacious Meadow spreads
Where yon tall Elms advance their lofty Heads,
With longing Eyes, the fair Inticer views,
And, roughly fond, with aukward Love pursues.
Shall MOERIS then; shall he, the Lubbard Swain,
Whose clownish Mein makes Sport for all the Plain;
Who ne'er one Lesson cou'd compose a-right,
Whose screaming Pipe does his own Sheep affright;
Shall He contend for bright LYCORIS Love?
Ah faithless Maid!  And shall successful prove.
The Lowing Herds perform the Lover's part,
And bleating Flocks soften the Virgin's Heart.
Her Vows forgotten mix with flitting Air,
And joyful MOERIS clasps th' inconstant Fair;
While in her Fault I this Improvement find;
Woman is never to her Int'rest blind.

AMYNTAS.
My love rejected, and my Vows in vain,
Oppress'd with Sorrow, I forsake the Plain;
With weary Steps, the pathless Desert tread,
'Till Grief conducted to this gloomy Shade:
Where spreading Yews exclude the cheerful Light,
And Birds of Omen seek continual Night;
Where boding Howlets, shuning Day, repair,
And flutt'ring Reremice fan the dusky Air.
Nor op'ning Bud, nor Blossom here is found,
But baneful Hemlock spreads the barren Ground.
This Place of Horror with loud Cries I fill,
While briny Tears my sleepless Eyes distil.
My Pipe no more is tun'd to jovial Strains,
But, in despairing Notes, of slighted Love complains;
And pitying Eccho, from the Hills around,
With social Grief, repeats the mournful Sound.
Be still my Pipe; ye Tears forget to flow;
Ye fruitless Cries, forbear to speak my Woe.
Complaints are vain which ne'er can reach her Ear,
Or if they shou'd, she unconcern'd wou'd hear.
Cease, Shepherd, Cease; no more thy Passion name,
Whate'er displeases is a guilty Flame.
In Silence wait, till welcome Death shall prove
The last sad Instance of thy Truth and Love.

THYRSIS.
Ah!  Woman, who shall sing the various Wiles,
By which thy Sex poor heedless Man beguiles?
Vain to attempt!  And sure the Setting Sun,
You'd dip i' th' Ocean e'er the Tale were done.
DAPHNIS, whose sable Locks, with comely Grace
Adorn the manly Beautys of his Face;
He, whose sweet Pipe affords such vast Delight;
Who tells such Wonders in a starry Night;
With fruitless Love, pursues a flying Fair,
Deaf to his Suit, regardless of his Care.
Ill-judging Maid!  To so much Merit blind!
Can any Nymph to DAPHNIS prove unkind!
In yonder Cave the mourning Shepherd dwells,
And vainly trys the Pow'r of Magick Spells.
Increase thy Flocks, Swain; those alone are Charms
Can bring the Fair to thy desiring Arms.

MOPSUS, for want of Words, with Gifts assails;
Yet even giving MOPSUS sometimes fails.
Gay AMARYLLIS once his Presents took;
A Cup, two Turtles, and a gilded Crook;
But when he gave no more, with Scoffs, the Swain forsook.

The Miser ALCON, when, with Beauty fir'd,
The blooming PHILLIDA his Soul desir'd;
Tho' Old and Feeble, courted with Success;
Pleas'd with his Wealth, She favour'd his Address.
The tott'ring Dotard to his Icy Bed,
Thro' Crouds of envying Nymphs, the Virgin led;
And now, with Pleasure, views his teeming Bride;
For what he wanted, CORYDON supply'd.

MICON.
Enough, young Swains; here let Contention end;
Hear my Judgment, and believe your Friend.
With haughty Maids a Sigh but ill prevails,
And He provokes, who at their Folly rails.
By turns they please us, and by turns they vex;
No more with Trifles then your Minds perplex;
AMYNTAS sweetly sings, and THYRSIS knows the Sex.
