Ah!  what a dreary spot of earth is this!
How slowly sad each ling'ring moment flies;
Here fancy never forms a scene of bliss,
But sunk in sudden night each prospect dies!

I've seen a pun just bursting from the mouth,
Abash'd return within the head again;
And oft I've seen give place to heavy truth,
The warm lie starting from the fertile brain.

Oft as we sullen walk the long parade,
We're all immers'd in silence most profound;
All seem involv'd in dulness gloomy shade,
Save where th' indecent tale goes laughing round.

Are these the youths that in Edina's town,
From tavern still to tavern restless rov'd,
All day employ'd in gulping claret down,
Or toying with the harlot that they lov'd?

"For them no more the tavern-bells shall ring,
Or busy waiters ply their evening care;
For them no courtezans shall sweetly sing,
Or climb their knees the raptur'd kiss to share!

"Perhaps within this useless sort resides
Some hero blazing wild with martial fire:
Perhaps each day around these ramparts rides,
He who might make the fear-struck Gaul retire.

"Some glorious Fred'rick that with glowing breast
Would have Germania's mighty force withstood!
Some gallant Wolfe may here supinely rest,
Some Murray guiltless still of Indian blood.

"Th' applause of shouting armies to command,
The threats of pain and famine to despise,
To scatter ruin o'er a smiling land
Their lot forbids, in peace our warriors rise.

"Haply of me some martinet may say,
Oft have I seen him at the peep of morn,
Brushing from soldiers coats the dust away,
And smiling on the raw recruits in scorn.

"Then near the edge of yonder thund'ring beach,
Whence darts the wild fantastic spray so high,
His mighty voice at noon-tide would he stretch,
You're worse than the militia would he cry."

His piercing eye each modern fault explor'd,
Much of the ancient phalanx would he speak,
Of heroes nobly falling by the sword,
Long tales he told, all borrow'd from the Greek.

'Tis May, the poet's month, yet all around
The savage climate wears a face of woe;
No verdure runs along the stubborn ground,
The distant hills still glitt'ring all with snow.

Ah!  where is fled the genial balmy breeze
That tepid warms th' enchanting summer scenes!
For lo!  no wanton leaves have green'd the trees;
Still swells the winter flood along the glens.

Yet oft the west wind wakes the purple morn
With breathing softness; &mdash; soon the skies o'ercast;
While thro' the air all darken'd and forlorn,
Howls the damn'd fiend that rides the eastern blast.

Daemon accurst, that never knows to blow
That flow'rs which burst along the vales of spring,
That never knows th' enliv'ning solar glow,
Which lures the nations forth, that float on waving wing.

Away!  thy influence damps each rising thought,
And heavy head-achs on thy steps attend;
To seek relief from thee these lines I've wrote,
Tell me when thy oppressive power will end!

How am I chang'd!  of late the wanton chuse,
Was wont to riot in poetic mirth;
While now I yawning sleep upon the news,
Or give to sullen elegies a birth.

But hark!  methinks the drum for Dinner beats,
To stomach keenly-edg'd a welcome sign;
For none on earth our well-bred table waits,
Brief let me be, or else I do not dine.

"Now fades the mighty roast upon the sight,
Thro' all the room a humdrum stillness reigns;
Yet some lament the pudding's speedy flight,
And one that all the soup is done complains."

Farewell, my friend, for lo!  I swiftly run
Where Highland beef invites, and sauces steam.
Ah!  much I fear that ev'ry dish is done!
Yet still methinks I'll get some tart and cream.
