Bud of that royal and illustrious rose,
Whose undivided hues of red and white,
No longer parted as contending foes,
Do now in colour and in bloom unite,
(Forming the country's glory and delight,
Of which their flower is an emblem,) thou
Whom after years may ripen to its height,
Though smiling lowly 'mid its foliage now,
Thy light haired tresses' weight &mdash; the sole one of thy brow!

Child of dissevered parents, one still here,
Not more beloved than amiable &mdash; the other
Gone to a brighter and a better sphere,
Regretted, as should be our sovereign's brother;
Alas!  'tis hard to think of him, and smother
The grief that rises at the thought, for he
Was of a kindly heart, and though another
May wear a crown as well, we shall not see
One of more gracious pride, or gentler dignity.

Alexandria!  princess of a line
Formed of the brightest links that ever bound
A chain of royalty, the muse be mine
To greet thee in thy young years passing round;
(If in a muse so humble may be found
Aught worthy note,) yet humble though to me,
If to the ear it not ungrateful sound
Of thee, or those who guard thee, I shall be
Proud of its tribute lay, and sing it boastfully.

Hail, then, Victoria, to the hallowed day
That brings the memory of thy birth to mind!
A day that does thy country's heart array
With hopes and feelings of the brightest kind.
But that which seems most fondly there enshrined,
Is, to behold thy form upon a throne,
When those who first must fill it, have resigned
Their glorious station, and their souls have flown
Where, when thou'st ceased to reign, shall also fly thine own!

That hope may ne'er be realized; the fate
That swept one lovely as thyself away,
May on thine own approaching years await,
And thy young form in grave as early lay;
For death is never partial in his prey:
The rich, the beautiful, the high, the low,
Fall in their turn the victims of his sway;
E'en at thyself is bent his threatening bow,
Though when the shaft may fly, &mdash; thy God alone doth know!

But thou art yet most young, and I will not
Over thy cloudless spirit throw a shade,
By dark forbodings of thy future lot,
Which could not perhaps too brightly be pourtrayed;
No &mdash; by the bloom upon thy cheek displayed,
The cheerful throbbing of thy tranquil breast,
The smiles in which thy blue eyes are arrayed,
The joy with which thy accents are expressed,
Hope whispers, "with thy presence earth shall long be blest."

They say, e'en now thou hast a queenly look,
And walk'st thy palace with majestic gait,
As if each pace thy royal footsteps took
Were conscious that it moved a thing of state:
Thy hand, as if it knew a scepter's weight,
They say, doth wave, &mdash; thy brow, as if it bore
A regal diadem, doth look sedate;
Yet though of dignity thou hast such store,
Of sweetness infantine thou still possessest more.

'Tis as it should be; from thee, as a child,
An antepast of thy maturer years
We glean with joy; for spirit frank and mild,
And yet so noble, as in thee appears,
Augurs most brightly, and the more endears
This day unto us; may it prove to thee
Happy as Heaven allows in earthly spheres
A day to pass &mdash; such days are not for me!
But, oh!  may all of thine as sweet and blissful be!
