On the banks of that crystalline stream,
Where Thames oft his current delays;
And charms (more than poets can dream)
In his Richmond's bright villa surveys;

Fair Lucy, of all the gay throng,
The fairest that Britain has seen;
Now drew ev'ry village along,
From the day she first danc'd on the green.

Ah!  boast not of beauty's fond pow'r,
For, short is the triumph, ye fair!
Not fleeter the bloom of each flower;
And hope is but gilded despair!

His desire, each swain now behold,
By riches endeavours to prove;
But Lucy, still cries &mdash; what is gold?
Or wealth, when compar'd to his love?

No, Collin!  together we'll wield
Our sickles in summer's bright day;
Together we'll lease o'er the field,
And smile all our labours away.

In winter I'll winnow the wheat,
As it falls from your flail on the ground;
That flail will be musick as sweet,
When your voice in the labour is drown'd.

How oft would he speak of his bliss?
How oft would he call her his maid?
And Collin would seal with a kiss,
Ev'ry promise and vow that he made!

But, hark!  o'er the grass-level land,
The village bells sound on the plain!
False Collin, this morn gave his hand,
And Lucy's fond tears are in vain!

Sad Lucy, too soon, heard the tale;
Too soon, the true cause she was told;
That his was a nymph of the vale,
That he broke his fond promise for gold!

As she walk'd by the margin so green,
That crowns Thames' his flowery side;
How oft was she languishing seen!
How oft would she gaze on the tide!

By the clear mirror then as she sate,
That reflected herself and the mead;
Awhile she bewail'd her sad fate,
And the green turf still pillow'd her head.

There, there!  is it Lucy I see?
'Tis Lucy &mdash; the lost undone maid:
Ah!  no, 'tis some Lucy like me;
Some hapless young virgin betray'd.

Like me, she has sorrow'd and wept!
Like me, she has fondly believ'd!
Like me, her true promise she kept;
And, like me too, is justly deceiv'd.

I come, dear companion in grief;
Gay scenes, and fond pictures, adieu!
I come!  and we'll gather relief,
From bosoms so chaste and so true.

Like you, I have mourn'd the long night!
And wept out the day in despair!
Like you, I have banish'd delight,
And welcom'd a friend in my care!

Ye meadows, so lively, farewel!
Your velvet, still Collin shall tread;
All deaf to the sound of that knell,
Which toils for his Lucy when dead!

Your wish too sure be obey'd;
Nor Collin her loss shall bemoan;
Soon, soon, shall poor Lucy be laid!
Where her heart shall be cold as his own.

Then clasp'd in the arms of that fair,
Whose wealth has been Lucy's sad fate;
As together you draw the soft air,
And a thousand dear pleasures relate;

If chance o'er my turf as you tread,
You dare to affect a fond sigh!
The primrose will shrink its pale head,
And each violet languish and die.

Ah!  weep not fond maid!  'tis in vain&mdash;
Like the tears which you lend to the stream;
Tears!  are lost in that watery plain,
And sighs are still lost upon him!

Scarce echo had gather'd the sound,
But she plung'd from her grass-springing bed!
The liquid stream parts to the ground,
And the mirror clos'd over her head.

The swains of the village at eve,
Oft meet at the dark-spreading yew;
There wonder how man could deceive,
A bosom so chaste and so true.

With garlands of every flow'r,
(Which Lucy herself should have made)
They raise up a short-living bow'r;
And sighing, Cry &mdash; peace to her shade!

Then hand lock'd in hand, as they move
The green platted hillock around;
They talk of sad Lucy, and love,
And freshen, with tears, the fair ground:

Nay!  wish they had never been born,
Or liv'd the sad moment to view,
When a Collin could thus be forsworn!
And a Lucy could still be so true!
