Verona's halls resound with Alboin's fame,
Verona's palace echoes far his name;
A thousand lamps emit their partial ray,
And vainly emulate the chearful day.
The proud associates of his gallant arms,
To joys devoted, free from war's alarms,
With eager step their leader's call obey,
And to a sumptuous feast direct their way.

"Wine!  wine!" cries Alboin, "is the drink of Jove,
Valour's reward, and all that share my love.
Bring me a bowl, t' allay my raging thirst!
How sweet thy taste!  of vintage thou the first!
Another yet!  yet more capacious still!
Falernian wine to th' highest margin fill.
The skull of Cunimond attracts my eye,
Emblem of mightiest feats beneath the sky;
Now decks my side board, as its noblest grace;
Oh, could I twenty others so embrace!"

Loud rang the hall with shouts of dire applause;
The Lombard Chiefs do honour to the cause.

"Fill it again," replied the King, "with wine;
In bumpers flow Falernia's choicest vine!
This goblet to my Queen convey in haste;
Bid her in honour of her father taste."

Depress'd with agony of rage and grief,
Thus to her tender heart she gave relief:
"O Rosamond, how hard thy fate!" she said;
"And yet thy Lord's stern will must be obey'd.
If my pure lips must taste this noxious draught,
May Heaven, all-just, its destin'd vengeance waft
With tenfold fury on his taunting head,
That tramples under-foot his marriage-bed!"

In silent indignation thus she mus'd,
Kissing the bowl, so wantonly abus'd:
Then to a bold assassin quickly came,
Of youthful form, and Helmichis his name.
With many sighs she told her woe-worn tale,
Sighs that ev'n echoed thro' the distant vale.
She saw the hero melting into tears,
Then seiz'd the moment to repress his fears;
Feigns to embrace his feet, and prostrate kneel,
Urges in Alboin's blood to dip his steel.
Sudden the hero trembling starts aside,
Thrice he essay'd, and thrice declin'd to chide.
Oft he revolves his matchless strength and mien,
And calls to mind the deeds he oft had seen.
But, bound in Love's imperious guilty chain,
In vain his plea, his scruples are in vain.
Leagu'd with a fiend of equal guilty power,
He rushes to the deed, (ill-fated hour!)
When Alboin, satiated with feasts and wine,
Retired from the table to recline.
His faithless spouse approach'd with wanton gait,
Veiling in darkness fell his short-liv'd fate;
With tender kiss, caresses false, and smile,
Pretends the tedious hours to beguile;
When, lull'd to rest by these deceiving charms,
She urges the Conspirators to arms:
"Haste, haste, my friends!  nor be reluctant more;
One stroke, and then your glorious conquest's o'er."

The Warrior started at th' inspiring sound,
Snatch'd at his sword, till now obedient found,
In vain he tries his faithless sword to wield,
In vain his arms their wonted efforts yield:
Their spears prevail:  by numbers press'd, he fell,
A dying look he cast, then bade farewell.
Whilst Cunimond's false daughter ran t' upbraid,
Too base to spare, and yet to strike afraid.
