That hour of morn was now approaching near,
When belles and beaux in dishabille appear,
When beaux and belles o'er chat-inspiring tea
Combine to fix the fashions of the day;
'Twas then that on two sofa's lay reclin'd,
A pair of gentle swains in sorrow join'd:
Papillio this, and erst the gayest wight
That ever fluttered in a fair-one's sight;
Narcissus that, than whom the softest beau
No sweeter dimple on his cheek could shew:
But this no longer flutters round the fair,
That fills his dimple with a falling tear;
Their sorrow's source the following strains disclose,
For these Papillio sung, Narcissus those.

PAPILLIO.
Alas!  poor Shock no more?  so short thy date?
Thy beauties might have hop'd a milder fate;
Could Celia's kisses no protection give?
Must Shock than vulgar dogs no longer live?
Now shake no more the collar, wont to deck
With glossy silver his more glossy neck?
No more for tea each morn on Celia wait,
Or cull the fav'rite morsel from her plate?
Ah no!  obdurate death has clos'd his eyes,
In Celia's parlour on a quilt he lies.

NARCISSUS.
How oft, poor Shock, with thy endearing play,
Hath Celia chas'd the tedious hours away!
How oft, when her embroid'ring needle tir'd,
And sweet romances ceas'd to be admir'd,
When cards, nor company cou'd please the fair,
Nor her own killing charms employ her care,
How oft, have gloomy vapours seiz'd the maid,
In spite of salts, or harts horn's boasted aid!
But thy caresses, Shock, the gloom cou'd chase,
And call forth smiles, the sunshine of her face!

PAPILLIO.
How oft, when I've to Celia visits paid,
And strove to shine before the lovely maid;
When I've admir'd the richness of her lace,
Or shewn which head-dress best became her face,
Describ'd how Daphne, last assembly, dress'd,
Whose silks were richest, and whose jewels best;
When thus my fund of wit I've talk'd away,
And knew not, for my life, what next to say,
To Shock I've turn'd (ah!  Shock, thou mak'st me own
What, but t' enhance thy worth, had ne'er been known)
I've turn'd and play'd with Shock, and that pretence
Hath hid, how oft, my barrenness of sense.

NARCISSUS.
How oft, at visits, when enliv'ning chat,
And piquant repartee itself grew flat,
And mighty scandal lost her usual force,
How oft' a gen'ral silence has ensu'd,&mdash;
Till Shock has stirr'd, and tattle strait renew'd.
Thy witty pranks, poor Shock, have oft prevail'd,
Where fashions, repartee, and scandal fail'd.

PAPILLIO.
Such Shocky was; then, who can paint the woes,
Poor Celia feels, such excellence to lose?
Extended on a couch the mourner lies,
With heart-sprung tears suffus'd her lovely eyes,
No longer flows in curling rings her hair,
Her dress neglected speaks her deep despair;
Here unregarded lies the rich brocade,
There Dresden lace in scatter'd heaps is laid;
Here the gilt China vase bestrews the floor,
While chidden Betty weeps without the door.

NARCISSUS.
Cease, hapless fair, those tears, those sighs, repress,
Reflect how frail is human happiness;
Nought is exempt from fate, we all must die,
Nor dogs, nor lovers, destiny can fly.
Then let not Shock such pungent grief create,
Shock must have sometime died, or soon, or late;
Admit consolement, wipe each streaming eye,
Another Shocky shall his place supply.
Another Shock shall frisk in Celia's arms,
And joy returning brighten all her charms.
