In climes where fiercely burns the solar beam,
Dwell souls untutor'd, save in nature's lore,
With well-brac'd arm they stem the rapid stream,
With hearts undaunted hear the whirlwinds roar.

See India's sable sons, a num'rous band,
Thro' gloomy forests chase the savage bear;
Each feather'd shaft, wing'd by th' unerring hand,
Deals the swift death; the well-earn'd spoil they share.

Yet what avails the blessings fate ordains,
When harden'd man pursues the hapless race?
Unmov'd he sees them, worn with heavy chains,
Denies his brothers labor's shortest space.

Perhaps, unprejudic'd, some feeling breast
Shall mark with grief a suffering people's woe;
Shall wish to see their injuries redrest,
Nor like their fellow men a fiercer savage shew.

'Twas at the hour of twilight's sober gray
When, sadly musing on this transient state,
Along the church-yard's path I bent my way,
Counting the solemn monuments of fate.

Startled I heard the death bell's awful tone
Slowly a passing funeral's steps proclaim:
With mournful looks the little train pass'd on&mdash;
Oh!  let not vanity despise this humble theme.

Poor pomp of pride!  say can such scenes inspire
The giddy thought, or urge the vain research?
No!  gay delusion sinks, and warm desire
Here fades the splendid dome and high rais'd arch.

Can blazon'd scutcheon, or can nodding plume
Exult the heart, chill'd by death's icy hand,
Or wake the peaceful slumbers of the tomb,
Or life's warm tide to the cold form command?

No more the morning's bright enliv'ning ray
Shall cheer their souls at labor's call t' attend;
Nor o'er the moor shall bend their length'ning way,
Or the glad night in festive revels spend.

Here, in a narrow space, the vaunted form
Of earthly beauty, frailest gift, is laid,
Cold is the heart that purest feelings warm'd,
Secure from flatt'ry rests the blooming maid.

Their fame, unmark'd, save by the mossy stone,
Half worn by time, the characters appear;
Extinct their names, their virtues were unknown;
Time e'en this sacred vestige will not spare.

The mournful train the opening grave surround
In awful contemplation of the scene,
With pity's tears t' enrich the hallowed ground,
And strew their cypress boughs with gentle mien.

Propt on a staff, a hoary-headed sage
Thus me address'd, in modest accent, mild,
Stranger, does this sad scene your thoughts engage?
If so, then pity sorrow's hapless child.

From India's shore the wretched mourner came,
Victim to ruffian force and harden'd minds;
A wreckless boast of ignominy and shame
To British souls, where freedom's laws should bind.

Torn from his weeping partner's fond embrace,
Regardless of the claim for mercy made,
Was forced wild ocean's utmost bounds to brave,
For sordid hire to slavery betrayed.

His soul, indignant, spurn'd the galling yoke,
Tho' forced to toil in hopeless misery,
By suffering was his gallant spirit broke;
He wish'd for death, to set that spirit free.

When to the British shore the captive came,
From rapine's sons his soul by death was ta'en,
Joyful he welcom'd his eternal doom,
Nor shrunk aghast from agonizing pain.

On yonder stone his epitaph is penn'd,
Sad tribute to the mem'ry of the man;
We are the hopeless alien's steady friend&mdash;
Approach, and read, if you the lines can scan.

"Here rests the victim of unlawful pow'r,
Unknown and friendless in a foreign clime;
Reader, his melancholy fate deplore,
By grief cut off in manhood's earliest prime.

"Warm was his soul, his heart was firm and brave,
His virtues mild, tho' unskill'd in learning's page;
But misery mark'd him as her hapless slave,
And stern misfortune pour'd her deadliest rage.

"Yet seek not to disturb his peaceful rest;
Forget the faults and errors of the dead.
No unfeeling mind his quiet can molest,
Where he reposes in his earthy bed."
