Farewell, ye tuneful groves, ye fairy glades,
Where erst I've linger'd many a fleeting hour;
Ye long shall wave your sweetly tranquil shades,
And on the scented gale your fragrance pour,
When this pale, faded form has sunk to rise no more.

Ah!  yes; for you, revolving suns shall bring
The summer's splendor, and autumnal bloom;
For you, the exhilarating sweets of spring
Will shed their soft, mellifluous perfume;
When low my aching head is pillow'd in the tomb.

Yon lucid stream shall wind its silvery way;
Yon golden orb in orient lustre rise;
Yon flow'ry plains, beneath his genial ray,
Shall breathe their fragrant incense to the skies;
When still'd this flutt'ring pulse, and clos'd these languid eyes.

Dear, long-lov'd scenes, ye taught my infant heart
The exalted pleasures nature can bestow;
Ye early bade the trembling tear to start,
Ere yet experience caus'd the source of woe;
Those tears I lov'd to shed, nor check'd their ready flow.

How oft, afar from folly's scenes retir'd,
My weary soul hath own'd your magic pow'r;
Ye sooth'd its secret sorrows, and inspir'd
The airy visions of the museful hour;
Visions that bloom and fade, fleet as the passing flow'r.

Yes!  my fond fancy, it had sweetly wove
Full many a beauteous scene of earthly bliss;
Had dream'd of friendship, gratitude, and love;
The gentle pleasures of a life of peace;
The sunshine of the mind; the joys that cannot cease.

It must not be; &mdash; ev'n now the fever's fire,
Relentless, speeds th' inevitable close;
Drops from my trembling hand the pensive lyre,
And soon its sighings sink to deep repose;
Ne'er more to wake to bliss, nor soothe my youthful woes.

Then hail, thou ruthless despot!  tho' severe
May seem thy dread decree in life's fair morn;
Yet wherefore would I wish to linger here,
Where disappointment plants the early thorn,
And fancy smiles in vain, when reason bids us mourn.

And lo!  from yon clear height I see descend,
Attir'd in radiance, a seraph form;
It points to realms where every grief shall end;
Where, nor the wintry blast, nor howling storm,
Shall e'er th' eternal spring of happiness deform.

Still I would fain the parting lay prolong;
Would fain my heart's full gratitude reveal
To thee, thou pensive bard!  whose melting song
Could oft from suffering many a moment steal,
And pour the balm of peace on wounds it only could not heal.
