Ah!  happy he who feels thy glowing rays
Illume his favour'd breast, Immortal Power!
In childhood's scenes, in youth's maturer days,
Thee shall he own in many a pleasing hour.
The pensive virgin in her lonely bower,
The ardent warrior, thirsting after fame,
Thro' paths where danger's threat, misfortune's lour,
Alike thy influence and direction claim.
Vainly to sing thy praise would I aspire;
Such glorious themes far loftier lays require,
A BYRON'S magic taste, a HOMER'S vivid fire.

For what were man without thy genial aid?
What is the fool, who spurns thy golden reign?
A wretch, in nature's vilest garb array'd,
Whom sordid interest's links alone enchain.
Life's sweetest ties to him are ever vain;
Vain all those joys that from affection flow;
Unshar'd his pleasure, unconsol'd his pain,
He doubly feels misfortune's ruthless blow:
A wither'd branch, disever'd from the stem,
He falls unwept, yet whom can he condemn,
For who can feel for one, who never felt from them.

The daring soul, the overwhelming arm,
The slight of death, by ancient heroes taught,
The fire of genius, beauty's melting charm,
E'en love himself, depriv'd of thee, were nought.
Thou must sustain the flame his arts have wrought,
Else quickly would it vanish into air;
Thou must inspire the daring deed and thought,
That scorns all danger, so it please the fair;
'Tis thine to fix the heart, to change too prone,
To centre all its hopes and fears in one,
And out of all the sex, to love but her alone.

Oft have thy votaries brav'd the shaft of death,
Despising all the pangs that shaft must give;
Oft the true lover has resign'd his breath,
She gone, for whom alone he wish'd to live.
In verse immortal shall thy name survive,
Oh!  Abydean youth youth, of dauntless soul;
Vainly the tempest howls, the billows strive,
And thunders, too prophetic, darkly roll:
He dar'd, alas!  too boldly dar'd the wave,
His Hero saw him sink, she could not save,
But faithful e'en in death, she shar'd his restless grave.

Nor is thy power confined alone to love,
Nor does thy aid to love alone extend,
Both will those gen'rous spirits ever prove
Who justly boast them in the name of friend;
Their dangers, hopes, desires, affections, blend
In one fix'd point inseparably join'd,
He who would praise the one must both commend,
For each is imaged in the other's mind.
Damon and Pythias!  admirable pair,
Your minds as lofty as your friendship rare,
How could a tyrant ask in love like your's to share.

'Tis thine, O Queen, to guide the poet's pen,
The fire of genius in the mind to raise,
And all th' illustrious host of deathless men
From thee derive their well accorded praise.
To thee we owe a MILTON'S lofty lays,
A BYRON'S feeling, and a HOMER'S fire;
BYRON!  whose chaste resistless muse displays
Whate'er taste, genius, judgement, can inspire.
O goddess!  o'er thy humblest votary's head
Some little portion of thy spirit shed,
Nor let her live unknown, nor join the ignoble dead.
