Hail happy Village, hail that sacred grove,
Where EMMA'S blushes bloom'd in HENRY'S love,
Where NEWTON studied, where th' immortal Bard,
Miltonick struck the grand inspiring chord,
Soaring to Heav'n, immeasurable span,
Paints the once bliss, portrays the fall of man.
Hail happy tenant of yon rural shade,
Ye fields, ye bow'rs, for contemplation made,
Where the high tow'ring lordly manor seat
Looks down on all, to give to all retreat;
Where lofty oaks in rude umbrageous form
Shelter the castle, and defy the storm:
In palaces like these e'en Monarchs reign'd,
Securely slept, and Angels entertain'd,
Till restless beings, covetous of store,
Fathom'd the mine, and grasp'd the precious ore;
Contentment barter'd for dissembling gold,
The wolf was left to prey upon the fold;
Cities were built, meek virtue went astray,
And vice eclips'd the sunshine of the day.
Still happy seat of innocence and ease,
Of harmless frolick, and of lasting peace;
Thy rural shades the rural mind invites,
And Nature dictates what the heart indites;
No din of war, no thirst of pow'r alarms,
And British freedom Britain's subjects warms.
Thus, when at dawn th' accustom'd carols ring,
Hodge smiling whistles, Long live GEORGE the King.
Sorrows unknown, save when at ev'ning close,
Sad Philomela tunes her midnight woes;
Tunes sweet distresses to remind the best,
That nought on earth makes man completely blest.
Yet calm as th' infant rock'd, no cries awake,
When reason leads us thro' life's thorny brake,
When unexampl'd virtue gains renown,
When vice can lay each bright temptation down.
Hark!  where beneath the summit of yon hill,
The reed sonorous to the purling rill,
Palemon tunes love's animating strain,
The cattle browsing on the verdant plain
Listen attentive, and the tinkling flock,
Quit the cool shelter of the stony rock.
Lull'd with chaste harmony th' inspired breeze
Forbore to ruffle e'en the poplar trees,
Save that which echo gave the trembling leaf,
Thus princely honour'd was Pan's rustick Chief.
But ah!  what strain describe, what language aid,
Collina's charms, Feronia's dove-ey'd maid:
She, while Palemon nurs'd the silver fold,
Sweet child of love, felt all the God foretold;
Her crook with blossoms wild was studded o'er,
Knots of white ribbon wove the hedge-blown flow'r,
Her cheeks like roses unimpair'd by time,
Her lips like Kentish cherries in their prime:
Her bosom heav'd a sigh, was heard to stray,
Collina vanquish'd, sudden swoon'd away.
Love too she sang, so pure the virgin drest,
That e'en the Robin plum'd his crimson breast;
Her words like flakes of milk-white feather'd snow,
Melted as falling on the neighb'ring bough.
To Nature's warblers what must mankind owe?
Tell me, Collina, thou alone canst know.
No parents here their dread commands impose,
But where love dictates, love resigns the rose.
Together train'd the fleecy charge to tend,
Virtues triumphant grace the bosom friend;
Love ever pure in infancy began,
The spark increasing till it blaz'd in man.
No village Fair Palemon's love supplants,
He nothing covets, and she nothing wants,
Wash'd by the rosy goddess blooming Health,
The bearded product golden gives them wealth.
Palemon rears the cot, 'gainst winds prepare,
While the sock lamb is fair Collina's care.
Nor woe they knew, save what the lambkin told,
When stray'd by chance, a bleat disturbs the fold.
At sight of her the lowing herd would speed,
To pay their tribute for the daisy'd mead;
Rob'd in her laylock skirt and primrose vest,
No courtly beauty more divinely drest:
Tho' Sunday clad, Collina not too fine
To pen the flock, to milk the yielding kine,
Hoard the rich treasure of th' industrious bee,
Palemon Shepherd, Shepherdess was she;
Palemon placid, never thought amiss
When he beheld a larger crop than his.
Vain sprouts the corn, still vain the burthen'd store,
If bless'd abundance makes us wish for more;
But if content, how mild, how calm thy ray,
How pure the thought, how happy shines the day&mdash;
Mark where the bush sweet Maia speaks the spring,
The timid bird essays the tender wing,
Bursting in glory o'er the pregnant earth,
To feed the sap, give vegetation birth;
Sol splendid rose his daily course to run,
The twig to paint, that bows to meet the sun.
The grateful glebe like olive green the shoot,
The bloom the orchard speaks the promis'd fruit.
In mazy windings wand'ring down the hill,
The crystal brook supplies the neighb'ring mill;
The verdant meads with modest cowslips crown'd,
The vi'lets purpled shed their odours round;
The full milch'd ewe the yellow'd fields adorn,
The full-blown fence now seems to bleach the thorn.
The thrush melodious courts the latent briar,
The songsters woodland join the rural quire;
Thrice happy spot to contemplation dear,
Like charming May you charm us all the year.&mdash;
Lo!  where the hamlets ivy'd Gothick tow'r,
With merry peals salute th' auspicious hour,
With sounds that thro' the chearful village bear,
The happy union of some wedded pair;
The modest look forbade a thought to sin,
Without how lovely, lovelier still within;
The vestal zone which bound her slender waist,
With valley'd lilies fair Aminta grac'd.
The wedding cake slow thro' the ring was led,
The stocking thrown across the nuptial bed.
The wheaten ear was scatter'd near the porch,
The green broom blossom'd strew'd the way to church.
Now Sunday come, at stated hour of prayer,
Or rain or shine, the happy couple there.
Where nymphs and swains in various colours dight,
Gave pleasing contrast to the modest white.
Yet early taught when for the Temple drest,
The plainer garb became the Damsel best.
Peerless in native innocence array'd,
The Bridegroom led the newly-brided Maid.
The constant village follow'd debonair,
Perfection knew not she was half so fair&mdash;
Behold yon Elms that grace the sacred road!
High rais'd, that leads to God's sublime abode.
The Church, bless'd mansion of serene delight,
Where groves of yew obstruct the hallow'd sight.
Spreading lone shelter to the solemn gloom,
Shedding their crimson'd berries on the tomb;
The cooling breeze on lofty Alders play'd,
The nodding Cyprus form'd the holy shade.
With reverential awe, and look select,
The broad-brimm'd beaver e'er commands respect.
Envy in vain could his perfections taint,
So liv'd on earth, he sure were born a saint;
Not ev'n a Stoick dare his virtues scan:
A truly rev'rend, and religious man.
His words attention every where diffus'd,
Foster'd the good, the bad alone accus'd:
His soul with honest zeal was daily arm'd,
His precepts cherish'd, and his virtues warm'd;
His doctrine such as practice soundly wrought,
Himself an image of the truths he taught.
He bore Heav'n's great commission in his look;
The tithe demands, but ne'er the poor forsook.
Settled disputes, what little had to spare,
He gave t' increase want's solitary fare.&mdash;
See where the village rang'd in comely row,
With hat in hand, and bowing humbly low,
The Squire attend until he comes to church,
Silent they stand, encircled round the porch.
Not that they ever for his Worship wait,
He knows the time, and never comes too late.
The service o'er, the health enquires of all,
And our good Vicar dines at Felix Hall.&mdash;
Next morn I ween the village charter'd Fair,
A day that's ne'er forgot throughout the year:
Soon as the lark expands her auburn fan,
Foretelling day, before the day began,
Then Jehu Ball, re-echos down the lane,
Crack goes the whip, and rattling sounds the chain.
With tinkling bells the stately beast grown proud,
Champs on the bit, and neighing roars aloud.
The bridles dotted o'er with many a flow'r,
The six team'd waggon forms a leafy bow'r;
Young Damon whistled to Dorinda's song,
The fiddle tuneful play'd the time along.
At length arriv'd, the statute fills the Fair,
Dorcas and Lydia, Bella too was there:
Favours and gauzes, variegated gay,
Punch loudly squeaks, the drum proclaims the play.
The pole high rear'd, the dance, the gambol, shew'd
Mirth and diversion to the gaping crowd:
Sam with broad smile, and Poll with dimpled face,
Revers'd the apron, shews she wants a place.
The race in sacks, the quoit, the circling reel,
While Prue more thoughtful buys a spinning wheel.
The grinning Andrew perch'd on folly's stool,
Proves th' artificial, not the natural fool.
For Hodge declares he thinks, devoid of art,
He must be wise, who acts so well his part!&mdash;
View now the vet'ran father of the fold!
By Temp'rance nurs'd, one hundred years had told.
A British soldier pious, prone to please,
Retired here to end his days in peace:
Soon as he came to join the jocund throng,
A lane was form'd through which he march'd along.
Shoulder'd his stick, with upright gait he led,
The many follow'd to King William's head:
For he himself, had for King William bled.
But yet with him, not deem'd a welcome guest,
Unless forbearance dwelt within his breast:
This wholesome precept was enforc'd to all,
The Squire put down each other place of call;
For if o'erta'en, the Vicar sure would chide,
As such, his Worship suffer'd none beside:
Th' landlord knew his task without being bid,
The beer high laughing overflow'd the lid,
His pipe he smok'd, drank to King George's health,
Despising all the luxury of wealth,
Observe he said, This day I shall command!&mdash;
Th' attentive Peasant wond'ring took his stand:
While on an oaken table smear'd with beer,
Trac'd with his pipe, the center, front, and rear,
Brandish'd his staff, display'd each honor'd scar,
And eager told whate'er he knew of war.
The siege describ'd, the memorable plain,
And zealous fought each battle o'er again.
Now ready shew'd where he in ambush lay,
Tempting the fortune of some doubtful day;
Here then he cried!  see there the open heath!
Where brazen trumpets rang the peal of death.
Here, though surrounded, Britain scorn'd to yield,
And thunder'd through the tempest of the field.
Vaunting so number'd those in battle slain,
Time seem'd disbanded, youth restor'd again:
Sudden now palsied shook his hoary head,
And wept to think how many brave lay dead.
Sorely lamented o'er another can,
That honor's purchas'd by the blood of man.
He paus'd, retreated from the well known shore,
The barren road grown fat with human gore.
Yet to one cause exclaim'd all battles tend:
The world's an inn, and death the journey's end.&mdash;
&mdash;Lo brumal ev'ning not to feasts obscene,
The rural tribe their rural race convene;
The cricket chirps; the pantomimic ray,
Diverts with Giant strides the fabled way,
The long mile shortens, while the length'ned tale,
Grows rich in fancy, as the shades prevail;
The glow worm's spangles spot the fairied road,
That leads to Virtue's ever bless'd abode:
While Cynthia pale reveals the plighted blush,
Wheels her wan course, and frolicks round the bush.
Happy alike when Summer's solar ray,
Converts the ripen'd grass to wither'd hay;
When the cool stream soft murm'ring rolls her wave,
Silver'd invites her wanton sons to lave;
Or 'neath some shady damask'd vale retreat,
Where jess'mine arbors scent the moss-grown seat;
Where fragrant suckles weave their lengthen'd bine,
Where briar'd sweets with roseate sweets intwine.
Glad'ning the morn, to pleasing tales invite,
Grateful vicissitude of day and night;
Or when autumnal joys enrich the field,
And golden products golden harvests yield;
Here scarce a weed among the corn is found,
So cultur'd well this little spot of ground:
Or when the Squire's known huntsman wakes the morn
With hollow shrill, or more enliv'ning horn;
With stern erect when Snowball snuffs the air,
Drags on the Fox, or finds the circling Hare;
Or when old Pero hunts beneath the copse,
Or Doll more daring, in the clover stops;
Each proud to shew the Squire what sport they can,
Hob marks the bird, and Ralph the chafe had ran.
No din was heard of strict manorial right,
His wish their pleasure, their's was his delight.
When he appear'd no tongue their joy could tell,
Happy to see, to hear, his Honor's well.
Meanwhile at home blithe innocently gay,
Papa's own image, skips the time away.
Diversions manlike press his feeble mind,
Acts as he acts, and as he thinks inclin'd.
If left to choose, a horse becomes his choice,
This he prefers to all his other toys;
In hopes e'er long a sportsman to become,
Rides on a stick, and travels sound the room.
Till tir'd at length, and having ran his course,
Down goes at once the rider and his horse;
Some ridge the carpet, or some fatal shred,
Mishap had thrown young master o'er his head.&mdash;
Still happy village, when bleak Winter's blast,
Makes mankind thankful for the seasons past;
When fields and groves, no longer form'd to cheer,
The rude, tho' thoughtful ev'ning of the year.
Yet the glad Peasant innocent of ills,
With studious care the fertile fallow tills:
The well stock'd market reaps from hence supplies,
The pamper'd earth resigns her hidden prize.
While born to labour the more aged swain,
Example gives to all the youthful train.
He good old man had never learn'd to roam,
His longest journey ne'er five miles from home;
Hoary with age he breath'd his native air,
Nor wish imbib'd beyond his elbow chair.
Daily the lessons and the collect read,
At ev'ning chimes the trembling taper led;
Nor yet forgot his long lov'd annual feast,
The Pilgrim's Progress, once a year at least.
The mind carousing no fond thought invades,
To break the calm that lulls her peaceful shades.
But orient like, the daily labour done,
All golden rises with the setting sun;
Which tho' fast shelving o'er yon snow topt hill,
Gives all the warmth more genial climes instil:
Though Heav'n's great lamp declines his brighter rays,
Love crowns the night, and shortens winter days.
No humours here infest the purer blood,
No dreams, sole cause of more voluptuous food,
That rend the curtains of the damask bed,
The restless case by dark intemp'rance fed.
But the meek housewife adds with prudent strife,
To nature's charms, what most embellish life:
She matron form'd each rural joy to crown,
Softness superior to the bed of down;
To teach by sweet example's sov'reign sway,
Her Girls to sew, her Boys to earn their play;
To teach that toil alone can still the grief,
Without the pain of asking for relief.
Train'd by her hand the Perecanther spread,
Mantling the casement with its cluster'd red:
The 'kerchief pinn'd, the modest cap put on,
The needle threaded, rural duty done:
The redden'd brick, the clean wash'd sanded door,
The lusty bantling, grappling on the floor.
The dreaming lurcher stretch'd before the fire,
Driving the game to meet the destin'd wire;
Runs the bare path the harmless sheep had made,
Now sprung the snare, now darting thro' the glade;
Brushes the slope, ascends the craggy rock,
Wakes the still musick of the slumb'ring flock;
With quiv'ring limb pursues the tim'rous flight,
As shock'd at deeds that shun the glare of light;
Wreathing the neck, sore grinds the fated prize,
Then licks the wound by which the victim dies:
While o'er his back Grimalkin's am'rous play,
Foretells, tho' fair, to-morrow's rainy day.
And haughty Mag by all the vale confest,
Undaunted struts a robber from the nest:
Raps at the coop, disturbs the speckled Queen,
The choice Sultana, Lady of the Green;
Peep'd though the chamber of her pregnant wing,
The feather'd promise of the early spring:
T' engage prepar'd the ruffled Partlet stood,
Screening the fondling of her latter brood;
The comb grew coral, and the pointed spear,
Arms the mail'd heel, half rais'd to guard the rear.
Like when a charger for the battle strong,
Disdains the curb to force the ranks along;
Th' eye streak'd with blood 'gainst th' adverse army neighs,
Bristles the mane, and all the line surveys;
Flaming with ire the scarlet nostrils blow,
Spurns the plough'd sand, and vaults to meet the foe.
The crested Heroine thus with sudden bound,
With hollow sounding pinion scores the ground:
The breast in discord bath'd and pent with rage,
Bursts thro' the railing of the ozier cage:
At length th' assistant vanquish'd, sprawling lay,
And left the Dame sole empress of the day.
With conscious preference now, and haughty stride,
She calls the youthier, perking by her side;
To where again, within the wicker space,
The crowing lineage court the warm embrace,
Where constant near the chimney corner fed,
With crumbs that fell from off the children's bread.
Here our own Susan daily told her gain,
Proud of the splendor of her milk white train.
But lo!  extinguish'd light's pale shiv'ring ray,
Clos'd the last remnant of the wearing day;
O'er the dark concave world's illumin'd glow,
Bright'ning the forehead of the Negro brow:
Snarling the cur steals sneaking to his watch,
To greet his master posted near the latch;
And the fond mother not less anxious sate,
To catch the wearied whistle at the gate:
The clock to count, that in the parlour clicks,
To hear the cuckoo sing the hour of six:
Then blames the mimic bird's deceiving cry,
The bird that told, what she detests, a lie.
For had not fleeting time's revolving stroke
Whirl'd the brass axle of the rolling spoke.
Pattern of truth, e'er now Tray's steady tongue,
Climbing the bank, had thro' the welkin rung;
Still where domestick care the hours employ,
The moment's trouble yields a certain joy.
When pleasing heard the well known tread approach
The pot has boil'd, the kilderkin abroach:
When wing'd she flies to see if she can trace
The new-born joy that plaits his honest face;
The sav'ry oven's wholesome banquet spread,
Which the rich golden neighb'ring fields had fed:
Sweet glean, that dreads nor iron hand of pow'r,
Nor gripe of wealth, that would that right devour:
Bless'd husbandman, thy hope, thy legal spoil,
The heav'nly product of thy sultry toil;
That heaps with store th' unenviable board,
That smiles obedience to the rustic lord;
The blazing hearth, the fam'd historick tale,
Warms the brisk tankard of the home-brew'd ale.
Prattling between these intervals of bliss,
The playful Infant courts the Father's kiss:
Climbs o'er his knee, and gently strokes his cheek,
Feign would say something could it only speak.
Learn hence, ye proud, that happiness can dwell
Supreme, beyond the pow'r of words to tell;
Where the brown loaf more solid gladness gives,
Than Greatness, thou, thy luxury receives.
But ah!  what means yon doleful sound of woe?
Procession moving, melancholy slow.
The Vicar leads the solemn dirge to join,
The Village pair'd unite in song divine;
Chaunting the hundredth psalm &mdash; The fun'ral knell,
Foretold th' old Soldier, old Acasto fell.
Alas!  alas!  the neighbours far and near,
Hasten to deck the good Acasto's bier:
The pall was borne by Shepherds &mdash; six were told,
That grac'd this ancient Father of the Fold.
The belt that girt his body to the war,
The huge broad sword, that gave the deadly scar:
Like trophies led to where his Fathers slept,
The 'Squire was there, and all the Village wept.
The Vicar's text, from that he never swerv'd,
Which gave him all the merit he deserv'd:
Excess, nor Winter's blast destroy'd his life,
Like Autumn fruit he fell when over ripe.
Conscious no force, nor flight itself could save,
Where cowards mingle with the fallen brave:
Life though he valu'd, not afraid to die,
Resign'd its comforts, nor yet heav'd a sigh.
Dying bequeath'd, though not on marble stone,
An epitaph, that might have graced one:
This to the Village left, 'twas all he had,
To cheer the good, to reconcile the bad.
While living, gave, whate'er he had to give,
As such, alas!  'twas all he had to leave.

EPITAPH.
In this bless'd vale Acasto drew his breath!
Here too undaunted, dauntless smil'd at death:
Prudence, directress of his little store,
Oft' left a little for the needy poor:
Temp'rance to man best gift he early sought,
Follow'd the path which Wisdom soundly taught.
This length of days to old Acasto gave,
This spar'd so long his body from the grave:
Spar'd him perhaps t' adorn some future page,
When record tells, one hundred years of age.
With manly fortitude, with decent strife,
He war'd against the varied ills of life,
Then Soldier-like each earthly dart defy'd,
Thought he'd liv'd long enough, and nobly died.
Shepherds attend!  like him at close of night,
When ev'ning blushes with departed light;
When the rose brightens as the sun grows low,
And Death with gentle hand inflicts the blow;
When the lone sheep retires beneath the shade,
From storms recluse for contemplation made,
Think on Acasto, stay the passing tear,
Nor dread the thought of dissolution near.
Tho' frail existence with unwearied pace,
Points to eternity's unbounded space,
Still life's last slumbers garland crown'd shall wait,
To glad thy passage to a future state.
The soul reviving shall each glory meet,
And feel its own, its own inspired sweet.
Cold though the breeze, the bark with sail unfurl'd,
Shall waft Thee soaring to th' immortal world.
While here with comfort unperceiv'd decay,
Life, sweetly slumb'ring, softly steals away.&mdash;
