Scarce steel'd to wear the heart's assumed control
Of guiding manliness, the father's breast
Struggles to choke the pressure of the soul;
The mother's lips in agony are prest,
The broken accents breathe that you are blest,
The fix'd eyes that follow you to the last,
The frenzied heart hid in affected zest,
The hands, affection's symbols, lock'd full fast,
The look that never pierced so far, and all is past.

This is to be severed, aye to be torn
From all that wild pleasure or clinging pain
Can be season'd by, as ivy, once worn,
Where it felt not with'ring blast, nor chill'd rain,
So inwreath'd, may no other bark adorn
Than its native one, nay to busy life
One other sunder'd rivet may be borne,
A tie is sever'd, where you could adore,
A tie that cool'd the fever of the heart's hot core.

Like the far deeper, lovely, quiet sky
Of southern worlds, o'er which aerolites,
Stars, and sweet soft blue clouds transparently
Wander, and, in days, that scarce pass the nights,
Into a sea of beauty sink and die:
So clear ran out my youth, but one storm cloud
Swelling, as swells misfortune, suddenly,
O'er all the hoard of joy its black wing bow'd,
And like the spread eagle's dimm'd all beneath its shroud.

Perturb'd to jostle as one of the throng,
To feel in all but disappointment there,
To shrink that e'er thou couldst become as one
Of the meaner things that to it belong;
First bear their stabs, now link with them in wrong,
Then is the soul of every hope bereft,
Passions mix antithetically strong,
And all of the dead brackish draught that's left
Is turbid wretchedness from a heart doubly cleft.

Amongst the many!  yet to be alone!
To seek, till wearied o'er and o'er again,
And, out of thousands, find no chosen one,
That thou couldst fitly consort with, remain;
To quiet, to share, the heart's restless pain;
Pain that all know not, none can e'er reveal,
Such pain, as fix'd once, seldom goes again,
Though miseries be, in which the wretch may feel,
The vulture may gnaw, till he sleepeth o'er his meal.

Gall'd by the implied sneer, and double word,
That chemic curdles thy young mounting blood,
And turns to madness, ere it scarce is heard,
As one sour drop to poison changes good,
Knowing no shame of thine its sting incurr'd,
'Twere sweet to scotch the serpent in thy grasp,
And see his swoln spires, as the cradled god,
The young Hercules, choked within his clasp,
His scal'd foes, and watch'd their last bloated black'n'd gasp.

What is the charm of one must perfect face,
But the stern tale of those indignant lines,
Flush'd with resentment's crimson glow of grace,
And the sovereign hope, that most reclines
On the revenge, his inward soul divines;
'Twere better so to rush, and die elate,
Than, like a flower, fairest on the plain,
Under its own clime, but, in its changed state,
Made loathsome, weedlike, abject, and degenerate.

Each passing brush doth sink or raise it higher,
Or tends to fix this revelling of the brain,
In that strange, harsh, high, low, medley of fire,
In all notes, so mixt that nought can detain
It in the temperance of one smooth strain
Of the melody, on which bliss takes wing:
Made as for unskill'd hands to touch the wire,
Fashioned but for perplexities that bring
Renovated discord the writhing heart to wring.

Laughter, too, so wild and melancholy,
Half like the man, half silly as the child,
Those involuntary shapes of folly
That mirth, by which no heart was e'er beguiled,
Transient stoicism, like a stream defil'd,
Which, through the naked course 'tis doom'd to go,
We hope that every drop may clear, reviled
Till hope's spring dry up, or stagnate so low,
The Styx-like waters once so cordial cease to flow.

To be in mad mood, sworn foe of your race,
Then wish again to meet in peace but shrink,
As though 'twere from the winding snake's embrace,
Or, as from some dark yawning horrid brink,
In whose abyss you must needs plunge or sink,
And thorns so shaggy planted as to pierce
With other wounds, though you escape the rock;
No choice but like the lion doubly fierce,
To flank the hunter's spear thrust forwards "cartey tierce."

There are hurts that escape all common sense
Of colouring, of that heart-sickening cast
Which, though of all others the most intense,
Are not so bland as the Sirocco blast
That leaves its death-sweep where it once has past
They're known by strange avidity of things,
None pitying, what comes they know not whence
To have, enjoy; yet all possession brings
Is but a phantom's mock, which makes unto it wings.

To live a wildering life of viewless length,
Void of expectation's transient charm,
Despair, remorseless tenant, gaining strength,
Which with the grasping of a spectre's arm,
Takes from us sense and motion with alarm;
Incongruous thoughts that burn upon the brain,
Like terrors in a dream, which nothing mean,
Sometimes clear away, and relapse again,
Starting, confused, images of mysterious pain.

Religion!  art thou that mock'ry of good,
So call'd by harsh fanatics Faith, Grace, Truth,
With Jesuit's leer 'neath the martyr's hood,
Zeal which, without the name, were madness sooth,
So reasonless, cheerless, estrang'd from youth,
Beauty, arts, letters, tolerated joy,
Receiving life's few precious gifts in ruth,
As nought were sacred but the vile alloy,
Commingling, in their creed, like poison to destroy.

Music, crowds, dissipation, silly talk,
This society?  this the soul's communion?
O gold!  pure pleasure enters not thy walk,
Making possession more, feeling less.  None
Am I from whom beauty has slighted gone;
Taste without fervour, whim without delight
Reigns o'er the half-day of their frigid zone,
Can golden gauds for the lost race requite
For the spirits', glories', sensibilities' flight?

Though this to-day's resolve, that to-morrow,
This whim rejected, that again cherish'd,
Now lost in pleasure, now bow'd by sorrow,
E'en till inconsistency hath perished,
Science my young day has yet embellished
With reason's light, and taught me to contemn
The sentence, which leaves this life unrelish'd,
Ignorance, superstition, curse of men,
Making earth Acheron, God a tyrant's emblem.

And I have been in that they call the world,
Among the fairest whom the world call fair,
And loiter'd and languish'd for eyes that hurl'd
The brightest radiance of beauty there,
And quaff'd of love my guerdon and my share;
I have been the vainest of the vain crowd,
Where none but earth's most ostentatious dare
To seek and find not; to the pageant bow'd
The all I would have been, or be, compell'd to shroud.

'Tis well, sometimes, to mingle, though we feel
Our spirits suited to another scene,
To learn, perchance, what man is, and to steal
A lesson, though such knowledge be chagrin;
Therein is that, by which we lose or win
All, in our nature, which is pure and bright,
The chastening of a spirit mov'd within
Our frames, to speed us from the tomb of light,
The film-fraught atmosphere of intellectual sight.

But man, the pitiful, the vain, the proud,
The fool of fashion, prejudice, and state,
Feebleness from his swaddlings to his shroud,
I hold so little that I scarce can hate,
With empty pomp his wretched heart elate,
Tyrant or slave as suits his low behests
His hollow homage or his cringing gait,
Creeds which are with most but words, deeds but jests,
Pity so blotted thing this goodly earth infests.

Though idling in the careless mirth of man,
The loosen'd soul forget its better part,
And is clogg'd with a sensual spur again,
Swiftly a word, a sound, wing'd like a dart
Electrically charm'd, awakes the heart,
Anew, to struggle with its froward clay;
The rebraced sinews pant afresh to start
To calm elysian fields, and entranced stray
To mansions of more golden being and array.

To meet the insults of debasing pow'r,
To bear contumely of the meanest thing
That o'er the world struts his frivolous hour,
And spews the poison of his loathsome sting
E'en on the eagle with its fetter'd wing;
To feel the wish to spring upon the foe,
As in years of yore when the blast would bring
The faithful vassal to avenge your woe,
Who flinch'd not till the red kennel had ceased to flow.

To know that speech and eyes must subtly wear,
If thou wouldst hope to shun unceasing hate,
Through all, a fawning obsequious air,
Well taught to call, unfelt as parrots prate,
Men's indignities benefits of fate,
And feel, that though thy noble rage may burn,
Malice, secure aloof, will, laughing, rate
And mock; pleased with impunity to turn
The caged tiger that can but impotently spurn.

To be forced to office which bears your hate,
To list command from all that you despise,
To feel each syllable but harshly grate,
To pour forth the bitterness that will rise
From the sour source, where all our wormwood lies.
'Tis time to change the note;
But when my song is thus, I'm most elate
The throes to give it words they say denote
The struggles that set the labouring wreck afloat.

When all above is dimm'd, and black beneath,
And convuls'd cries come forth from the deep swell
And surf, waves onward, in commotion, wreath
Their foamy bright edges, and seem to tell,
In distant threats, that blacker ones impel
Their rushing course, that night mix'd sea is grief:
In the storm partly earthly, partly hell,
A dim bark rides, for refuge, out of reach,
And sinks at last unseen, riven planks strew the beech.

So like grief's wretch, that harrow'd lost one trod,
Who heard the waters come as o'er his head,
And call'd desperate in fear on his God
To spare a soul not fitted for the dead,
With mist for winding sheet, and surge for bed;
But some still live and wish them in the grave:
Man may be wretched till be cease to grieve
At wretchedness; love freedom, yet a slave;
Yield dastard-like to foes &mdash; tho' his heart be brave.

To feel the mind, whose blossomings expand,
Crush'd 'neath a petty toil, an abject lot,
Resentment boiling at some scorn'd demand
That stains the spirit with a slavish blot,
Spoken with a tone scarce, for a pause, forgot;
Though sweet oblivion may steal o'er sometimes,
It but awakens to a brow more hot
And laughter, like a lost soul's damn'd by crimes
The heart with a fatuous burst not pleasure, primes.

There are, who will deem this perverse, 'tis truth
'Twas gain'd by use of ill and thinking much
By mind too busy even from my youth
That the lot of all, save by chance, is such,
The good suffer most, the wise struggle much,
But the proud, vain, alone exempt can vaunt
That they least know the paralyzing touch
Of ruthless sour neglect, and caustic taunt
This life's chill breath, hard couch, and agonizing want.

Man's coward taunt is almost ever spent
On the stricken deer, 'tis safe to inflict,
Where no resistance comes, and keen indent
The wrath that cools not but by being lickt
By that which passes us our nature's piqued;
The Lion snared and sunder'd from his den,
Attracts, like bloodflies, meaner foes secure,
Who flesh their hatred with that spirit then,
Which once at large had smitten terror into men.

What's to the world the mind's fast flow'ring rose,
If canker'd want entwine about the stem,
None can see beauty, where that canker grows,
As a deer, parted from the herd, to them
Is he, that the tinsel lacks, the false gem
Of lucred worth; how the bauble hunters fly
The wounded hart, save one, that shall contemn
His fellows on the way side wild and shy,
Perchance the bright neglected treasure doth espy.

In low estate a star without a course,
A sun summerless, a grief-clouded light,
Scarce prying through the mist with broken force,
Images the great mind's neglected might;
As the moon rises to illume the night,
And turns to splendour, when it sinks away
Growing more cold, dilated, pale, and bright,
He wends to his effulgent tomb, where the bay
Makes too late requital to the undying clay.

Ye dull!  your's is the mean of happiness,
But, sons of genius!  pupils of your God,
Most to the quick do ye endure excess
Of the world's woe, not so the vital clod,
Scarce conscious of the all chastening rod,
'Tis time to break from this loath'd scene of man,
Stay!  towards one lov'd light the tree will nod
In all weathers:  we together began
When life's dial at noontide stood its ways to scan.

Say, my friend!  by what philosophic art,
Thou canst the bowl raise lightly to the lip,
And still, with nature's chosen gifts of heart,
Although thou kens't the bottom, smiling sip?
Thou art a bird of calm, whose wings none clip,
Tho' life's insipid, void of envy, hate,
On troubled waters suffered safe to dip,
Above all mediocrity of fate,
Indifferent, calm, unsadden'd in every state.

Looking like mother at her child that plays,
Have we not seen the silent Dian sleep
Upon the waves, like the halo, whose rays
Guard sleeping angels, and the moving deep,
In concentric waves of light, seem to keep
One calm, slow, urging ripple to the shore,
The sparkling playful breakers gently leap,
To their finite bounds, and recede once more
To mingle, whistling, where they parted from before.

Beneath the blue clearness of that night's sky,
And tender planet of angelic light,
'Twere sweet, in the star studded galaxy,
To move like her all glorious to sight,
And view the earth of one heavenly dye,
Softening woods, waves, mountains, and the vale,
And where one long sheet of light descends, sigh
In such a track to bid the world farewell,
Oar'd like yon night-bound bark from land, for there's no gale.

In the full floating South Atlantic sea,
Where cloud-like Vecta checks the west'ring tide,
And her grey shores gleam as brilliantly,
As the bright fringed waves that beat her side,
Moor'd fleet, and flaccid sail expectant ride
For the fresh land-breeze, and approaching night,
One tall tapering spire their beacon-guide,
(While on the sleeping waves they roll in light,)
Amid whose cloister'd shades the southern Tasso died.

A summer calm had lit upon the sea,
Scarcely an eve-wind wrinkled o'er its face,
The sky and earth seem'd one eternity,
And smooth usurpers of a boundless space,
Of life or living things there lack'd a trace,
Save that between each tortuous wave
With wheeling motion and a way of grace
A snow-white bird did float and gently lave
Its sea-wet wing, as flits a seraph o'er a grave.

The sail was o'er, the faintest breeze did sleep,
'Twas meetest then to pace the stilly deck,
And see both light and shade dispute the deep,
The dim line of signals, and, o'er a wreck,
To mark death's lurking place, a beacon speck;
The hoarse brawl of mariners who utter
The lead's shallow fathom, the last link's check,
Of the chain-rattling anchorage, the flutter
Of a black sail o'er the bow, the crew's faint mutter.

To roam in darkness, when the world's asleep,
To gaze the tenanted firmament and stars,
To hear the endless throes, that stir the deep,
To breathe the ocean winds, and feel the bars
Of an invisible world, though it mars
Repose, lifts the soul to a boundless dream
Of an all huge eternity, that wars
Against the vision of our mental beam,
Clashing man's nothingness with that which is supreme.

O tell me not of love:  where is that one
Whose love could mingle with this gall'd spirit,
That hope was cherish'd once, but now 'tis gone,
Let them covet its balm, who inherit
Some lady art, some favourite merit;
Who pities, who could share the rankling heart,
And when fortune goaded me would bear it
Partake the pains which hapless fates impart,
Or dispel the living venom from the barbed dart.

Thine was love, Lenza, of that sinless kind,
Like the dew on Hermon from heaven shed,
Exhal'd from youth, the leafing of thy mind
And nascent passions, springing in the bed
Of a spirit so chaste, but few could wed
That, which to all else was as from a sphere,
A purifying heaven before, as the dead
Are, when risen from the ensabled bier,
And join'd that azure world &mdash; that world, some hope, some fear.

Thou nature's favourite!  a gift to earth!
How could I have woo'd her, and thee her child,
All that she embellishes, or gives birth
To, has charms for melancholy as wild
As those sudden sounds, which have oft beguil'd
The lost traveller in his trackless way.
They bear no studied form, no mock of art,
But expression, pure born as the prism's ray,
Harmony most witching to the ear, and yet not gay.

I had lived to lose the thrill of pleasure,
Yet her dark eye's chast'ning had power to raise
More joy than flattery's sick'ning measure,
Or all others' ill-timed obtrusive praise.
There are beings, whose souls are as a maze,
Which, blest things in their whimish wanderings
Impart a treasure to, whose gentle blaze,
Like the pure gush of a scarce seen fount, springs
Natively as melody from musical strings.

'Despite his crabbed frown, thy smile was mine,
Tho' prouder lips dropt honey-dew of praise,
And I, as one unseen, loiter'd supine,
'Mid the candied lispings of the light maze,
E'en the dazzling of applause could not raise
The eye, below the dark lash softly thrown
Upon the chords whose mellow thrills did chase
After thy hand, like the wind harp's, when blown,
After the south wind, seeking as 'twere none but its own.

I lov'd her that they told me of her love,
How that she question'd when I pass'd away,
How long, and to what haunt, I chose to rove,
How that I held myself from day to day,
Then into silence sunk; anon a ray
And upcast gaze again would fire her eye,
If, once, in casual words, the name did stray
To her ear, and stir the fond thoughts that lie
In woman's heart, breath'd in no language but a sigh.

There was a night!  the wroth sea's distant roar,
Fore-spoke of storms, I paced, paused, listen'd, heard
Its oft spent struggles up the pebbled shore,
The breeze grew faint, the aspen scarcely stirr'd,
Veil'd 'neath the droopt willow, some scarce breath'd word
Like moan of shrubs, by winds of rest bereft,
Arose:  we met; I pray'd thee not to grieve,
'Twas not for thee to expiate the debt,
The bond I owed to destiny, and long regret.

'Tis sweet to think we gazed upon the moon,
And felt the witch'ry of the self-same hour,
And our deep vow renew itself, as soon
As she rose full-orb'd o'er bank and bower;
Never shines she so on tree and flower,
But, lo, I hold the converse of our tie
With thought of holy awe and mystic power,
Creating in the soul's intenser dye,
A form, a dream, a shadow, a most lov'd mock'ry.

Never returns that moon and fated eve,
But there a change comes o'er me like a spell,
Charm-like as that, a cloudless sky will leave
On a dark land's most scath'd and shadow'd dell;
'Tis that I feel thy virtue's spirit swell
With all its sweet retention in my heart,
Sunk as deeply there, deep as in the bell
Of the cystus lurks one blest spot:  tears start
Then, such as saints might shed for those whose sins depart.

My life's young rise was smitten with a cloud,
But thine was stainless, oh!  chaste and stainless,
As Dian when first o'er Endymion bow'd,
Purifying with its refin'd impress
My own swart and evil desolateness;
The bosom's inward tempest sunk away,
And frown and flash dissolv'd in calm
distress, Before the holy glow and vestal ray
Thy lovley features stole from heaven on that day.

But love will not always last, hearts will change,
Suspicions, tales, all tend to turn its course,
And pride, rank, homage, false doubts will estrange,
And the rude bidding of parental force.
But though to part be just, a dark remorse
Will follow, the self thought of wrong disdain,
That sunder'd its fellow chord, what was worse
We cannot expiate by smiles again,
The ire where we have ceas'd to gaze, and left in pain.

Though the reed is broken, its dying flower
Will retain the fragrance it had before,
But its presence ne'er can brighten the bow'r
Of first hope.  That lives, which cannot implore,
Where once 'twas spurn'd to be taken once more:
How oft does fortune vex, and throw a die
To mingle that poison in our heart's core,
Which darkens enough the glance of an eye
To mark some breasts that can meet but in rivalry.

Yes, there are who have loosen'd the fine tie
Of souls:  Wretch!  thy cold bloodless heart shall waste,
Though, at thy dying couch, that form were by,
Fiends shall linger for the soul that's in haste
To quit the stiff corse, which the worm shall taste,
The breast that was flint, the frown that could turn
The green leaf yellow, by which 'twas embraced,
Shall bear, like a slave, its own chilling spurn,
In flames that kill not the sense, tho' they scorch and burn.

Not all the prayers of that faint meek voice,
Not all the hope that pallid form could give;
Shall him, who stabb'd her weeping breast, rejoice,
Nor empower, one moment more, to live,
Think what thy passion's prey'd upon, and strive
To ward off the edge that wounds in the love
We have no claim to, nor can timely thrive,
Where atonement, too late, and pang'd days drove,
Sepulchral sadness into the young heart they clove.

There are beings of light, which shine to fall,
And such was she, as young and fair a star
As ever glitter'd at her Maker's call
Her gen'rous unstain'd soul, in passion's war,
Fell branded, and mortally bore the scar
Of meaner rivals:  death could not dismay
Her chaste spirit, so much as the rank jar
And hiss of those, who trample when they may,
And, like Thrasimene's birds, poison, where they prey.

Where death, most fatal, lies within the veins,
Cormorant-like he gluts him on the store,
But still the cheek the rose of beauty feigns,
Till the heart's blood is suckled to the core,
And th' insatiate can be mask'd no more;
Some so die, call'd radiant from this scene,
Who too much of heav'n in their lustre bore,
Too wise, too beautiful, and too serene,
To live where crime and blemish foully intervene.

In the dell, where she hid her from the storm,
They found her by the perfume of her breath,
For sorrow had so nerv'd her gentle form
And urged her mind, that, scarce, she felt e'en death,
And fled with a fresh frenzy o'er a heath,
Bearing myrtle and making a damp crown;
The brier rose sweeten'd by the show'r, wreath-
Ing it, the night shade, and flow'rs o'erblown
When on her hot brow bound &mdash; to die she sat her down.

Parting like the parting of fine waters,
Reclining much in elegance of pain,
Her voice grew low, check'd by gentle falters,
She prayed that little more she might sustain,
And beckon'd them, that sorrow'd, to refrain.
A gasp's heard; &mdash; they start; &mdash; of heaven's daughters,
One, redolent of the skies, joins the train,
They, who hoped, in her hymeneal way,
Favours to have strew'd, pace slow to the Rebec's lay.

Her heart was broken, and it flutter'd out,
Thrilling feebly within its milky walls,
It beat more slow, at last, it came about,
It beat less, by gradual gentle falls,
It ceased thus sped her soul, with plaintive calls
On heaven, to take her to its abodes,
Her clouded fate the virgin's ear appals,
Some strew'd flowers, some the grave did load
With tender hymns, how grief did her young heart corrode.

Some hymn'd of virtues none did e'er excel,
The mother, sense struck, gazed her harp and wept,
And started wildly, when she heard the bell,
The younger sister to the loose neck crept,
And through the jetty locks her fingers swept,
And smooth'd them all apart, and save the face
Was narrow'd, and the brightest blood had left,
A smile was here, and there an angel trace,
A woeful solemn change, unlovely, yet 'twas grace.

All that night the west wind sigh'd more loudly,
And whistled thro' the hail, where she lay dead,
Her favourite flower, which looked so proudly,
Wav'd and murmur'd, as tho' it knew her tread
No more would come to prop its drooping head,
And from that rocky dell for ever mute,
A virgin's dole was heard so full of dread,
And wilder sounds, as of a lady's lute
Soothing the implacable waves with sweet salute.

Sometimes they say that strain is heard,
In those bewitching beauteous eves,
When nought attends, save one sweet bird,
Who, always, in her night cell grieves,
A wild and witching spell it leaves,
Which mortal music never knew;
If wand'ring footsteps seek to tell
Whence the mystic murmur grew,
They wend into that lonesome dell.

Yet find no form, but, where it rose,
It shuns approach, and growing less,
Falters to a tremulous close,
Like the concealment of distress,
With a more low and plaintive tone
A viewless Ariel of the air
Bequeath'd to that spot, and that alone.
They muse what thing more bright and fair
Utters such sacred music there.

There blooms that lovely tree, that lovely tree,
Where, adown, she would sit with her guitar,
And play an air so wild and mournfully,
About two that lov'd, and one, that afar
Wander'd and died:  she felt that, in their star,
Her fate was told, and hung her brows around
With flowers, that survive their vagrant roots,
And, now a dainty meal the worm hath found,
Where, save one willow'd man, none haunt that lonesome ground.

If there's melody in the harps trill'd cords,
And grace in woman bending to its strings,
If there's pain in love, death in tender words,
If there's a chaster gloss in halcyon's wings,
If summer's sun exquisite glitter brings,
She was passing fair!  but all have their cloud
Of sorrow, each braving, in turn, the stings,
And never was heart so stoical and proud,
That hath not heard a kindred woe, and wept aloud.

Misery claims a stop in every breast
Which we dare not open, lest it should prey
On the heart.  Let the widow'd mourner rest!
Her death was as that planet's parting ray,
Which sheds its latest light at coming day,
Glorious within as the child of kings,
Her love was his on earth, his in heaven,
Plunged in light with the sky-dove's silver wings
And plumes dipp'd in gold, 'midst heaven's bright picturings.

Come thou, young vision, take thy last adieu!
That "wild word," by which some hearts are graven
With a sad fond something they never knew,
Till 'twas breath'd, most like a touch of heaven,
Or the strain'd lute string's sound, ere 'twas riven,
All I could give, and more than thou couldst crave,
Were thine, the purest drops that filter'd through
The rest is but the tenth wave, meeting wave,
Eddying, breaking, foaming forwards to the grave.

But words, vows, sighs, to thee are nothing now
Thou art cold, void, dead, deafen'd to the sound
Of speech, of music, song, to the sweet low
Of ev'ning cattle on this fairy ground,
Thine own tones, and lament of thine heart's wound;
All the bright sunshine of the virgin spring,
The wave immers'd in wood, the steep embrown'd,
Birds on the shoot, and creatures on the wing,
No more shall tint thine eyes, nor o'er thee kisses fling.

Hadst thou been shroudless now, I would ask
Not once the winning smile of first approach,
That sunny smile, in which I used to bask.
Others might kneel, I would no more encroach,
But did aught rest, the longing heart would broach
It were to know by gazing on thine eye,
That love's last mem'ry had power to touch,
How much still was mine, when life's set was nigh,
By the mute gripe, fixt gaze, and heart-expiring sigh.

There dwells a viewless music in the soul,
Mansion'd like the sea-shell's nat'ral melody,
Voiceless, save when Aeolian whispers roll
Through its pearly cloisters, and suddenly
Awaken all its bosom's charm'd reply;
Such rare joy exists in man to atone
For the day's weary plodding and deep sigh,
And give us, of a thousand hours, perhaps one
When the vex'd spirit is not harden'd all to stone.

Somewhat atones the farce of human life,
The memory of genius gloss'd and clear,
Some placid brow surmounting worldly strife,
Still on the wing with nought to hope or fear,
Too purified for this beclouded sphere,
Some bosom, where a pensive spirit dwells,
Cast for the placid smile and tender tear,
Knit to the shelter of her native dells,
With love of sweetest lore the lonely vestal swells.

Beautiful as dew upon the sunken flower,
And eve exhaling, in the summer heav'n,
Ambrosia from every weeping pore,
Of every plant, earth's bosom shelters then,
Is the lovelier lore of gifted men,
Whose lives are wedded to the search of thought,
To virgin sacred singleness of mind.
Wooing to themselves breath and nurture wrought
Of the soul and essence of minds divinely fraught.

Amid the people of the pathless wood
Whose silv'ry branches, waving to and fro
And tuned like lutestrings tempt the wind to brood,
Trampling o'er the dead leaves 'twas meet to go
Where the runnel, called to the vale below,
Swept 'neath the shade of "melancholy boughs,"
In this my silvan meditation slow,
The soul reminded of its holier vows,
Numbers the deeds undone, which it to glory owes.

Bosom'd in the hollow of the far hills,
As placed by young hamadryads away,
From scene profane and loud; the wood glen fills
A little space, the cat'ract's bubbles gray
Dash through the leafy shade, and onward stray
In snaky maze, around the vocal hills
Remurmuring, the hymns of myriad bills
Would murder silence, were it not the lay
Blended like lips and language with the vernal day.

Sweet glen!  thee have I loved that thou wert near
With thy sequestered shade and sylvan bench
To shroud me, when more wonted scenes seem'd drear,
And o'er me wave thy shelt'ring leaves, and wrench
Or lull the pain my heart's too prone to bear,
And though scarce might my pale brow hope to wear
Its former freshness, yet would thy calm green
And blue-bell'd banks, and dripping sedge appear
Wet with nature's pity and undissembled tear.

Within an amphitheatre of huge hills
Whose majestic woods sink into a space
Where scarce is loosed a murmur, Tintern fills
A well-provided niche, looking the grace
Of sainted sorrow; there's sketch'd, in this place,
A character most strange to the hard world,
A peace shrined and settled in its embrace,
As serene as the bluest cloud unfurled
Above, as the most placid wave beside it curl'd.

Thus earth's green mingles with splendid rain,
Thus holy Tintern, roofless, lovely pile,
With fragments, shafts, arches, still imbuing
The place with beauty, rests, wreck of a lost style;
In moonlight, him who paces down thine ile,
When the breeze woos the walls and flow'rs around,
A mild sublime emotion shall beguile,
Of the solemn sadness that doth abound
On that most still romantic melancholy ground.

Holiness has made its holiest shrine,
And dwelt in a most placid picture here;
Amid these woods, unruffled and divine,
The soul's unwrung devotion breathes forth clear
As the bruised sandal's aromatic tear;
Regarding thee, the world foregoes its shock,
Nor lists the weary more its bonds to wear,
Gather'd as the clematis to the rock
In one last clasp, strength, odour, bloom, together lock.

The earth-dissever'd look, th' indifferent smile
Viewing alike the present and the past,
Cast here the parting cling of good or guile,
Of love or hate, into one thought &mdash; the Last!
Here the dropping sail settled still and fast,
Here the bark anchor'd at the final shore,
Away all phantasies and troubles cast,
All's written in the words &mdash; No more!  no more!
A fix'd calm, the port gained, a ghastly voyage o'er.

'Tis peace that meeted with the lifelorn veil
Of the lost fair, that bade the world farewell,
For who could in heavenly breathings fail,
That sigh'd in the shade of that solemn dell,
And number'd their days by its vesper bell;
But thy sisters white never more shall chant
Around thy altar high, or holy well,
Hymns, which no earthly melodies may paint,
Though struck were soft Eoel's harp by Cambria's saint.

To brawling Vaga's best relic, go; see
The mould'ring shrine, beneath the limes' arch'd shade,
Sombre wood, skyey roof, and weeping tree
Bending o'er, and sequacious ivy laid
On salient walls, like a grave array'd
For maids!  there deem how greatness may be strew'd,
The measured hour, and stern decree obeyed,
But ye, of whom that fane is rightly view'd,
Need not that the self-whisper'd fear be here renew'd.

There's courtly hall and many a bower
In Cambria's land and Cambria's vale,
And many an old and rev'rend tower,
But none that may mock at that abbey pale
And its own sylvan solitary dale.
'Tis the work of the dainty tyrant Time
That loveth on beauty most to regale,
And drags away loveliness ere its prime,
And leaves but the heaven-lit wreck to mark his crime.

They ope the portals suddenly, and flash
The grand and inward picture on the eye,
Folding the full soul, at once, in the clasp
Of awed devotion, and solemn ecstasy;
The floor is green-sward, the roof the blue sky,
Th' oriel window's glass'd with heaven's light,
And tombs, altars, and monkish fragments lie
Fitly confused, and sculpture of strange knight,
And many tokens of this frail world's frailer might.

We pass from Arvans and ascend the steep,
Capp'd with pines projects the brow of waters,
And here they show a lover's seldom leap,
A chasm in the cliffs, downright, shagg'd and deep.
Whence mayst thou gaze, till dizzy terror creep
Through thy veins &mdash; Chaos summons her huge force
To join the meeting waters in the sweep
Which brings them nigher to the bounded course,
An ocean at the end, a fountain at the source.

But he who would bestir him from the gaze
Of terror, and heap't chaos of the earth,
This dream of headlong horror may erase,
With a more wooing, placid, and sweet birth
Of thoughts, where cinctured in their craggy girth,
Piercefield's bowers an Eden's beauty rear,
Amid all of beauty's apparent dearth;
As if enchanted footsteps bade them wear
The signs and semblance of unearthly visits there.

O Piercefield's pious, soul-illumined maid
He, to whom tales resembling thine are balm,
Speaks, "Rest to thy manes, bliss to thy shade!"
Thy simple history breathes a very calm
O'er suffering spirits, chasing the qualm
By showing woe so meekly borne:  the charm
Of pure devotion meting out the palm
With genius:  together twined, tame, yet warm,
The fabled serpent came to thee without his harm.

Thou wert of people of a gentle kind,
Who live as the veiled dwellers of the grove,
Whose days of thought and elegance, inclin'd
To peace, pass like the being of a dove;
Fitted, in the throng, nor to shine nor move,
A nature beautiful within its shade
Of inward stealth, below, and yet above
The world; congruous in its fashion, made
To these haunts, ariel like, hov'ring but to fade.

Lift ye to her an ivy'd sepulchre,
Where the humid atoms of the eve shall weep,
And, fretted with the gust, the high boughs stir,
In melancholy murmurs, dirge-like and deep,
That he, who shall his nightly vigils keep
In Piercefield's whispering groves and shades, may meet,
In all the strains which thro' those mazes creep,
The fancied echoes of the kindred feet
The poet's spirit most would welcome there and greet.

Couldst thou but gaze on that leafless bower,
Where so late we sat in the summer sun;
Couldst then but gaze on that broken flower,
That seem'd by fairy hands woven and spun,
Dead and drooping to earth, its life outrun
The light does not break thro' that covert thick,
But the blast rustles thro', both rough and dun,
The leaves roll o'er the grass and gather quick,
Where the "hoar willow" weeps under her tresses sick.

Oh nature is clothed like a dying maid
Whose beauty has been and is scarcely past,
And, tho' glittering less, and less array'd,
Is loveliness still, of a sadder cast,
And heaven and heaven-like to the last,
Tint by tint she flutters and falls away,
Like the waning moon, when the morn comes fast,
And the light that held its fairy horn sway,
Melts from earth with a fading form and feebler ray.

'Tis autumn, and the demon-driven gust,
Wakes sounds like frenzy's wild notes in the wood,
Making the dishevell'd hills like the bust
Of ravish'd beauty, and the troubled flood
Wears a deep brumal hue, like lavish'd blood,
The blast wing'd foliage flits upon the wave,
The raven croaks where late the wild dove coo'd,
Telling the summer's lapse, who o'er the grave
Of her despoil'd chasms paused, for mercy seems to crave.

What tells us that the rosy season's fled?
Is it the red-breast's plaintive melody,
Or the sumach leaf's coral colour'd red,
Or the farewell summers, and well-a-day
Of autumn winds, or the temperate ray
Of a slanter sun, or the saffron tinge
Topping the gorgeous boughs, which latest stay
On the proud oak, unwont to cower or cringe
To the stern storm, that rends his eagle shelt'ring fringe?

The flowers of autumn die, but none can tell
They are dead; Death ne'er banquets on their bloom
Dried, unwither'd, it seems not as they fell,
But bloom'd summer trophies in winter's gloom,
For the hues of beauty survive their doom,
To catch the eager eye with sad deceit,
In rougher days; as, in the fated loom
When shrouds for maids are woven, albeit
A living charm there lingers, as it ne'er would fleet.

The heavens are crimsoning around their king,
Vermilion clouds prepare the western throne,
A couch of scarlet woof, whereon his wing
May drop, tho' in beauty he is not alone
To kindle the hush'd ev'ning's tender tone.
For, meekly blue, as heralds of a bride,
Thin mists mantle in their queen, who, like one
That loves a silent solitude, doth pride
Herself in walking, when the stir of day has died.

She courts the amber hour, and reign of shades,
On which no dazzling glare of morn obtrudes,
To daunt the sacred chastity, which fades
In shameless day, her own orb's light denudes
Her crescent form, and rites, and chaste preludes,
What time cold virgins trim their lamps to cool
The flame of love, and gather glow-worm prudes,
For dewy sacrifice at stagnant pool,
Where sprouts the barren herb, and things unfruitful rule.

Dian has made her bath within the grove,
A bath of droppings of the evening dew,
Distill'd from hanging moss and shady cove,
And fays, and wood nymphs greenest leaflets strew,
To hide her chaste form from prurient view.
Gaze not lest that chastity strike thee blind,
Till her bright beam is temper'd to renew
Its ascent in heaven, for when the wind
Her coming whispers, her beams their bright course shall find.

'Tis dark above in heaven, dark below,
The mountain wood casts blackness on the night;
Save on the oaken ridge, that skirts its brow,
And marks the frowning hosts of leaves to sight,
All is dinginess and far void of light;
Yet a lone cloud seems struggling into birth,
With skirt of gold, a messenger to plight
Heaven's queen bursting from her skyey girth,
To unfold her star-chased coronet to the earth!

The moon's on the wood's edge, and such a moon,
The dim seen valleys gorged with dusky trees
Catch the chaste beam, and then transmit the boon
Of trem'lous rays to mingle with the breeze,
And make a stilly night of solemn peace.
Two blasted oaks apart, with branchless heads,
Seem still as 'twere, and callous to the ray,
The earth around an honey'd odour sheds
With breath of dim-seen cattle on their grassy beds.

Things celestial never bear a shroud
Behold she pierces, with her glossy light,
Through the frowning bosom of yon black cloud,
Repelling darkness with the calm self might
Of all her beauty.  Oh!  'tis a charm'd sight!
Most glorious! &mdash; like to an angelic dream
A strife betwixt her godhead and the night,
She mounts on car of pearl, and the swift stream
More slowly glides, and turns to amber in her beam.

'Tis summer's last, so large, so cloudless, pure,
No shade around but her own pallid haze,
Like a thin azure veil, and a sweet lure
To the saint's eye, woven in the hid maze
Where the unhappy look for bliss secure;
And here a grove that shades the water's sides
Is frescoed forth in character obscure,
And he who wanders now in lonely pride
Enjoys the cool heaven, fringed wood, and rippling tide.

What exile lives who cannot well disclose,
Things which the spirit's sense has felt full well;
There's a clime 'neath the blush of the bid rose,
Where wanderers voluptuously tell,
That they, who seek on moonlit ground repose,
Watch an arc bent to earth as heavenly
As ever sunny shower at noontide shows,
The leaves quake 'neath that bow as yellowly
As the golden ringlets of the liburnum tree.

Child!  in this mysterious intercourse
With nature, thy spirit too daintily
Has fed, till thou canst only turn perforce
To hackney'd things:  the broadwing'd soul can find
Fit repose and fellowship in the wind,
But man narrows its expansion; alone
'Tis thy lot to be, self with self to bind.
The great world were a wilderness!  the throne
To most of glad echoes, has not for thee a tone.

Where in the mountains, thy fancy feeding,
Has the way of thy shoon and sandal been?
Perhaps, when the sun is brightly receding,
Thine oak-crown'd brows, like a druid's, are seen
Sitting on mossy trunk, on glade or green;
But now, will thy calm tones heard be no more,
They shall flit like a voice small and serene,
Which was breath'd aloft, and stole o'er the shore
From the shade of a moment, and then was no more.

The poet is Cassandra of his doom,
Nature's strange child, her druid, and her priest;
On her sibyl countenance of outward gloom,
She breaks the meaning presage to his breast;
The lines and veins of destiny, imprest
Thereon, colour th' involuntary mind
In the frail garb she wears, his spirit's drest,
His hopes and fears are in that voice defined,
As a familiar spirit within was confined.

'Tis o'er!  it was for thee I struck these strings,
Perchance not well nor wisely, but all's one;
Its own note cheers the meanest bird that sings,
The second rising's not like the first sun
I've told a mystery of things said or done,
With a wild scambling mood of song and sense,
With much of suff'rance mingled with a tone
Of joy, in visions here, and there, and hence,
Though they touch not others' hearts, in mine they sink intense.

If there be, who have felt that in their youth
Which grief can cause, and write upon the cheek,
They will not blame that I have drawn forth truth
From the mind's chaos; the full heart will break
Or dare its sad confessions; and but weak
Were the words, though fraught with heaven's music
To gather home the soul and charm the break
Though the life green branches are forth and thick,
The hollow tap forebodes the worm within the quick.

When nerve, and name, and life alike are gone,
The heart half broken, and the brain on fire,
One, who a spent volcano stands alone,
Self-consumed in the ashes of his ire,
May say, when shudd'ring o'er this voiceless lyre,
There was, who broke thy wild harmonious waste,
That, swan-like, he, in music, might expire,
Who liv'd the woes of ecstasy to taste,
And utter'd Promethean pangs with reckless haste.

The famish'd falcon tumbled from on high,
Ne'er droops his gnarl'd spirit to the last,
But knits his brow o'er his flame-darting eye,
With a frown as deep, though his force be past;
The gaze, that brook'd the sun, is ne'er o'ercast,
Till the film of death's arch'd around its rim
And thus alike in times to be and past,
The poet's soul makes mows at fortune's whim,
And defies her frown the heavenly glow to dim.

Fame!  'tis said, uncourteous thou dost shun
The more import'nate suitors of thy grace;
That the more craving spirits seldom run
The chariot, that wins to thine embrace,
And clasp the bright coronet of that race.
I'm in the lists with a most barren hope,
Looking on loss or gain with cold grimace,
With too much scorn with feebleness to grope,
And with too little envy with the great to cope.

To rarest minds alone the gift's disclosed
To leave a wasteless immortality;
Wheresoever they haunted or reposed,
To engraft a mem'ry on flow'r, or tree,
The consecration of fame cast destiny
Graved in the crystal of an inspired lore
To live in song &mdash; told perpetuity,
In shrine, such as the brightest bow before,
In unask'd homage, if but thus, scarce gods are more!

I cannot cater for the coarse applause,
The venal clap of world comported minds;
To me it were no triumph, could I gain
The fray, which the dull world together binds;
There the day's nothingness its guerdon finds,
But echo-like I would my name should pass,
Like a fountain's murmur, the voice of winds,
Or the evening's breeze o'er the summer's grass,
From lips and lays of beings of a choicer class.

I was cradled in the lap of mountains,
And grew most loath to be the dull world's slave;
Soaring like them, I bowed not to the chains
They must endure, and smile upon, who crave
A smooth path to the one great heart to pave.
But a glory seeking, which is our own,
We look, thro' the soul's prison to the grave,
With nought beyond, save the unfading crown
Which wraps our pale mortality in bright renown.

There are those, who have had it too, when they
Who had marr'd them, have sunk into the tomb
Where linger'd not a solitary ray
To brighten their own flesh corrupted gloom;
The very grave itself has been the womb
Of their great fame, uprising like the spring
Of northern winters in a perfect bloom,
And everlasting as the deep blue ring,
Which spanning o'er the earth is spread out like a wing.

A name, breath'd by the young and beautiful,
Echoed to the lifting of the small wave
When down they lightly float, and oft recall
The stars of memory, the past time gave
To thee, when the brow is calm, smooth, and grave
With musings, that, in silent concert, drop
A freshness o'er the heart like dew, and lave
The bruise which inly aches, and ope the stop
Of peace, which pervading the whole, sits at the top.

A spirit like his, who took up his abode
In harmony with nature and with love,
Himself to wean from the earth's heavy load,
Hermit of the Sorgue, green cell, wave, and grove,
One who sought a lov'd solitude, and wove
Therein the divinity of a name
And, kindled into bright abstractions, strove
His spirit to purify and reclaim,
Betrothed to no ties save those of love and fame.

Thy banks, O Sorgue!  thy lovely shades, Vaucluse,
One beheld fitted or to rise or shine,
True philosophy's most adorn'd recluse,
A great nature, allied to the divine,
Shunning man, to purify and refine
His heart in secret, to him love or song
Were passions, which became him as the sign
Of all, that to a spirit could belong,
That spurn'd ambition's honours and the loose-lived throng.


His life was vent in a sequester'd song
Of an imagin'd love, "'twas but a dream,"
Yet liefest of the fairy forms, that throng
And wing around the image-crowded stream
Of a poet's fancy, of the rays that gleam,
Thro' the flower-crown'd lattice of the mind,
When its loftier toils require a beam,
A loved deceit, with which it seeks to bind
Up the heart, which is void for that it cannot find.

'Twas not the life of man nor of the world,
Nor willing to be clogg'd, nor to endure
The coarse weeds of harsh employment, but curl'd
And parted like a brook 'twixt sun and shade,
Extracting all of earth's form that was pure,
It was from innate wisdom he withdrew,
The freedom of his nature to secure,
Seeing little of men, but to renew
The tie, that 'twixt him and more high devotion grew.

Solitude could not quench his mighty fame,
Nor smother, in its gloom, the voice that woke
The hermit's tale, and laud of Laura's name.
His lure through the clouds of a dark age broke,
And delphic voice of coming brightness spoke;
How much more beautiful, but full of pain,
Are they who thus a mighty muse invoke,
Feeling the things, which others do but feign,
The glow of flame, which holds within a waste-life reign.

Oft have I said, in fancy's fervid dream,
Oh!  would life glide as stoically down
As yon wandering philosophic stream,
Gath'ring as it strays an increased renown.
As one in greatness gradually grown,
Lioness like, 'midst her whelps she nestles
In the lap of every obstruction thrown
To mar her fair course, and proudly wrestles
On, till conquest with repose around her settles.

Had life been happiness, I had not liv'd
Till now, thus murm'ring at the harsh decree.
To see its close approach, and be depriv'd
Oft, as it seem'd about to wing to me.
All this to make gall bitter was, to be,
And will be; but it cannot bar the sense
Of love, of beauty, which, where'er I flee,
Sparkles o'er me, sky-colour'd and intense,
And breaks the benumbing fog, be it e'er so dense.

But the hot sense of beauty and of love,
Of song, of glory, and of scenes like these,&mdash;
Of the green earth below, and sky above,
Of harmony, when heard on moonlit seas,
Or, as a casual spirit, in the breeze,
Is not happiness!  it doth but inspire
Chords, the more harmonious made by pain,
Thrice chasten'd in our youth's exquisite fire,
Oft temper'd past the lawful bounds of wise desire.

Yet, sometimes in this dim and broken way
Some sunny tracks of genius sheen awhile,
And seem as o'er strew'd with many a ray
Which, with more care, had brighten'd to one smile
Of love to man, with nought of stain or guile:
The wayward spirit great through all its gloom,
The good will weep, though bigots may revile,
Scatt'ring their soft tear o'er the wither'd bloom
Of what though blasted so deserv'd a better doom.

We must quit this, there is another world,
'Tis the Cumaean way to lands that shine;
Perchance those golden clouds by the gale hurl'd
May ship the blessed in.  As Proserpine
Dropt and wept her nosegay, I would entwine
Though held but for a moment, in this braid,
A symbol of some sweets that have been mine,
For myself the nightshade, with willow laid,
Lilies for her, and flow'rs befitting holy maid.

There are seasons, when death is not a pain,
But an angel minist'ring to the mind,
When life's a fiend, we can but ill sustain,
And dogs us, demon-like, where e'er we wind;
And double how we may, we still do find
The weight of woe so heavy at the heart,
That we could deem nought but a curse could bind
Us to the oppressive tie and deep smart
We have scarce deserved, but which, alas, will not part.

Let my death be, as life has been, alone!
Parted from the herd, silent to await
The glazing eye, sunken cheek, and last groan
Which gravely close the farce of human life
Even at that hour, I'd be loath to mate
With man, &mdash; the sun rose singly when he rose,
And unattended fill'd his proper date,
The small star sinks as singly at its close,
The lion calls not for the jackal, when he goes.

May such a prophet-cloud as dimm'd the moon,
And whisper'd o'er Corinna's fated soul
Death has softly snapp'd and stolen the tone
Of that bright silver cord and broken bowl;
With like import my dying vision cowl.
Behoves that nature owns me to the end,
Child of the scenes I quit with ruder scowl,
As far as unto man my thoughts can bend,
But turn with thrills of rapture, where her glories tend.

For aye!  his ark is moor'd upon this spot,
A temple raised unto his love and him,
Till life, like the last vivid flash, has shot,
"Of intense glory on th' horizon's brim,
When night o'er all the rest hangs chill and dim;"
And, he ne'er quits his rock-hewn cell of death,
Meet sepulchre of the world-worn pilgrim,
Nor turns from kindred scenes, that show no lack
Of broken majesty, and desolation's track.

Eternal hills!  you do not melt away
Like the eyes that gaze upon you, the minds
That gather you into their little ray
And urge their dominion o'er you.  Fate binds
Them to a call ye obey not, and finds
A curb for the proudest in a brief lot;
But the stream of ages still winds and winds
Its silvery links about you; though jot
By jot you waste, no time comes which beholds you not.

The spirit went, an urn were all it asks
Between some steep lone chasm's green recess,
Where, amid the crisp'd waves, the sunset basks
In the clear eve's last rosy loveliness;
Some tone unwont the winds may there express
The murm'ring leaves, the hum of shardborn fly
O'er spring's young boughs, so small and shadowless,
May draw thereto the wand'ring thoughtful eye
Of one, the wave forsaken pebbles pacing nigh.

Now farewell, Wye!  the man with robe of grey
Shall ne'er see ivy nod o'er ruin more,
Nor sooth awhile his inly stricken cares
Where day bedights old Penyard's umbrage o'er,
And pine-topp'd May beheld from distant shore;
Flowing and flowing on, thy waves shall glance
The beams of rising morn as heretofore,
Nor he behold with "mazy error" dance
Their watchet wreaths to shun the jutting mount's expanse.

Thus all must end, thro' every change of woe;
Ye scenes, belov'd for aye, it must be so:
Adieu!  'tis the last vale perhaps, for oh!
Something about this heart, that's yet to know
Awaits.  Stalks will wither that cease to blow;
A boding voice says it will not be long,
And let it speed, the weary well may go
&mdash;Here in low cadence sunk the Pilgrim's song,
He is gone: &mdash; Echo did some notes like these prolong.

The tempest fell, and the storm clouds bereaved
His youth of all its leaves how soon he grieved,
With grief immortal!  yet, each lovely scene!
His abortive hopes were erewhile as green
As yourselves; and he gazed as one who's blest
By gazing; and, more than all, fain to rest,
Like the spent stag, which, where first roused, there sprang
Last, engored by wounds from his fellow's fang,
To die, home's, the Argive's, music in his last pang.
