Days of my youth!  too quickly fled,
Visions of love and bliss, adieu!
How ill acquired the aching head,
And manhood's sorrowing heart, for you!
Ah!  what avails, with hopeful eye,
The raptured Future to descry?
In kindness hid the dark unknown,
Be our's the pleasures past, since our's the Past alone.

Why lingers Recollection still,
O'er the fair scenes of lost delight;
What time, from yonder eastern hill,
Rose the mild sun of Being bright?
It is; though calmer reason turn
From wilds where Fancy's meteors burn,
She fondly gives the pensive tear
To joys by truth approved, and held by memory dear.

O come the forms by Feeling wrought,
And chace the soul's sad gloom away!
O come! &mdash; for years have only taught
How soon the seeds of bliss decay,
Lo!  by the tempest, sternly rude,
Life's blooming promise all subdued;
And manhood's yet unwithering prime
Shrinks at the wintry blast of unrelenting Time.

If high ingenuous Honour charm;
If Beauty win thy fond esteem;
Warmth, prompt at friendship's call to arm;
And Woman, all that lovers dream:
Thy mind from bitterest anguish free,
If days unclouded thou would'st see;
Then, close thine eyes on youth's gay lawn,
While yet the Eden bloom, while now the morning dawn.

Weak man!  what means the wish to gain,
With wearied steps, fame's arduous steep?
Why madly trust the faithless main,
To grasp Profusion's glittering heap?
Even all that conquest still adorns
Is often but a crown of thorns;
Still, the proud standard that he rears
Is hailed by orphan cries, and drenched with widowed tears.

Shall lettered Glory's generous toils,
A brighter recompence bestow?
Ah!  what are Learning's envied spoils,
But slight, and penury, and woe?
Deep to the winds poor Genius sighs,
And roves unseen, with tearful eyes;
Nor pitying friends his fate enquire,
Till, borne by misery down, unaided Words expire.

Since honours, riches, genius, fail
To soothe and satisfy the mind;
I turn to that Elysian vale
Of loves and graces, yet behind!
There, Fancy all her scene arrays;
There, Nature at the heart-strings plays;
There, sweetly wild, the varies year;
There, Joy's extatic thrill, and April's cloudless tear.

Days of my youth!  too quickly fled,
Visions of love and bliss, adieu!&mdash;
But ill exchanged the aching head,
And manhood's sorrowing heart, for you!
No more intent, with hopeful eye,
The rapturous Future to descry,
While kindly hid the dark unknown,
Mine be the pleasures past, for mine the Past alone!
