Far from the busy hum, or worldly tale,
From venom'd censure, or the voice of mirth;
From wild ambition in this lowly vale,
From cultur'd scenes that clothe the senseless earth.

Here silent reigns a sovereign repose!
No tongue to cheer, to sooth the pensive hour,
No spring to wake the fragrance of the rose,
As soft descending breathes the tepid show'r.

No wavy prospects golden harvests yield,
A gloom like blotted day obscures the light
To wither'd scenes the pining bosom steel'd,
Stoops to the solemn privilege of night.

Sunk in her orb lone mis'ry groans beneath,
Fate adamantine darkling fix'd his throne;
Dwelling among the gloomy realms of death,
Marking these hopeless regions as his own.

The poppy scarlet choaks the ribbon'd mead,
That spoke luxuriance from yon orient hill
Bleak chilling blasts more od'rate growths impede,
And sadly glides the once transparent rill.

Vain the high mountain airy curl'd the brow,
Vain stem'd the storm that 'gainst the forehead beat;
Or calm'd the drowsy stream that flow'd below,
Or sav'd thy tow'rs, from ah!  the wreck of Fate.

Lo!  here the remnant which once lofty swell'd,
By time despoil'd, now nods its plumy crest;
Tells by how weak a tenure it was held,
The head reclining on the drooping breast.

The mid-day sun, that fost'ring warms the glade,
Through mould'ring chasms darts a feeble ray,
That shoots grey dawning thro' th' affrighted shade,
Or lost itself by wand'ring from the day.

Lighted to Heav'n, thy head sublime unshorn,
For length of ages stood the harden'd rain;
Religious fastings, penitential born,
Defy'd of ills th' inevitable train.

Yet hark!  no more the solemn midnight bell
Save what the tinkling fold might leave behind;
To cloister'd vigils now a long farewel,
Where holy virgins murm'ring worlds resign'd.

Lost now the way, forgotten too the road,
Where bid the beads at stated hours of pray'r;
Where peace the hoary comforter bestow'd,
Where Pilgrims roving hail'd a Sabbath here.

Thy stately pyramids as lab'ring bend,
Saluting chaos with a cold embrace,
While others sink, still lab'ring to ascend,
Maintaining awful rev'rence for the place.

Pillars, like massy forests prostrate hewn,
Like leaves of oak in ancient honours fall;
Stretch'd in huge ruin o'er the moss-grown stone,
Shews time's resistless force must level all.

Those arms that once aspired to the sky,
Couch'd like a lion slumb'ring in the way,
Waiting the heedless trav'ller's passing by,
Or sleep dissembling, while he springs his prey.

With lordly rage confronting tempests bore;
Hurl'd thy proud battlements deformed fell;
Let human frailty hence, portray'd, deplore,
Nor brave the menace angry peals foretel.

Learn hence, ye Great, nor you, ye Poor, despair;
View the vast remnant of once boundless sway;
While crumbling winds the humbler cottage spare,
Sigh in the breeze, and smoothly steal away.

View the carv'd marble heaving from the ground,
Earth felt the shock convulsive in her womb,
As tho' th' Archangel's solemn Trumpet's found,
Awoke the clay-cold tenants of the tomb.

Thro' sculptur'd isles mosaic wrought inlaid,
The wily serpent darts his forked tongue,
Spoiling the waste dominions of the dead,
Wreathing the grass, moves hissing slowly on.

The font emboss'd with incrustations hard,
Tub'd through the leaky bason, pendent stole;
While holy thistles, mint, and scented nard,
Convey'd a thrilling transport to the soul.

The Purpled Star with lineaments divine,
As tho' the rude yet hallow'd spot to greet,
Renascent wove the ivy'd holy shrine,
In all the glory of its passion'd sweet.

What impious hand shall dare thy bow'rs prophane,
Or wanton cast the emblem bless'd away;
That gems with pearl the dew-drop candy'd rain,
That oozing fragrance blossoms in decay.

The path that eastward led, obscenely wore,
Where once Religion's heav'n-born precepts smil'd,
Beasts from the rocky cavern hunger'd roar,
Or prowling fierce, the trackless haunt defil'd.

Imprison'd gales like captive tyrants howl,
Far from the friendly shelter of the barn,
Around th' embowel'd vault the screeching owl
Broods o'er the path grown intricate with thorn.

The subterranean dell wolves whelps invade,
Daws wheeling round the darken'd air inshroud,
Chatt'ring thro' feeble twilight's mellow shade,
Obscur'd the glimm'ring with a feather'd cloud.

The Bird of Presage from the turret's height,
Flapping the Raven pinion, boding rose;
Croaks thro' the still solemnity of night,
To spoil the calm that cheers a last repose.

Lone sober ev'ning meek with blushes shews
The tinctur'd glass rich burnish'd to the view;
The Master's touch with new-born colour glows,
Warm'd by the moisture of the falling dew.

Or, when the vivid flash, or forked glare
Mocks the pale entrance of th' envelop'd Sun;
As wept his beams, peeps thro' the fractur'd square,
His own more radiant purer streams to shun.

The Bat amphibolous with leathern wing,
Flitting refracts the sprinkled waning gleam,
That magic waves the Fairy-fancy'd ring,
That peerless shines, of low'ring night supreme.

The guggling brook obstructed fobbing weeps,
The tear thro' vases consecrated led;
Or pent with rage the fluted column sweeps,
Drowning the verdure it benignly fed.

No songster's dreaming warbling strains repeat,
No leaf impervious screens the cradle nest;
No zephyr fans the harbinger's retreat,
No breezes rock the infant charge to rest.

Beneath the pile, or near the stagnate pool,
The bloated vermine loathsome poison spit;
Or fowls of prey, the rav'nous thirst to cool,
Hov'ring with fear behold thy ramparts split.

Palsy'd and silver'd with descending age,
Some unshod father trails the weedy lawn,
Winding this way his fix'd diurnal stage,
Half-blind with zeal, long since from life withdrawn.

Mail'd with intrepid virtue, doubts to quell,
Wanders the Mass, that holy fury paints;
Kneel'd to the Cross, with speechless stone to dwell,
With hands uplifted to departed Saints.

The forlorn Peasant worn with toil complain'd,
Sang loud his vespers, superstition led;
Hard food but sweet, by upright means obtain'd,
By daily labour earn'd his daily bread.

'Twas here the Mendicant's bewilder'd mind
Reviv'd, 'till reason may grand truths display,
'Till Christ himself once more shall heal the blind,
And beaming light the darken'd soul to day.

Yet under various forms agreed to own,
At least to mean, when forc'd at Nature's call,
One Pow'r immense, that looks complacent down,
One Great, one Best, one only Lord of All.
