Nay!  must the ill-tuned mind, in sooth, comply,
And sweep the harp's corroded wires along,
Time a change has wrought, since its wont reply
To echo's mockery of the cheerful song,
With such energies as to joy belong;
In startling silence, toneless it has hung,
Unless, perchance, a breeze did sigh among
The vaulted halls, where, erst, its paeans rung
To touch of minstrel boy, in life's hid ways, when young.

The light sounds, it gave then, yielded no pain,
The jocund measure of youth's minstrelsy;
But ill could, now, the heart's pang'd pulse sustain
One chance thrill of the heedless ecstasy,
Which does but our woes renew to memory:
Nor, yet, can I resist the soft desire,
Of her, whose spirit fix'dly turns to me.
Strike then, my Harp!  if e'er thou didst aspire
To draw the charged stop of the Poet's dauntless fire.

But let my lays be plaintive, and be sad,
Though less, mayhap, they charm the flippant ear,
Than quick exulting strains more nimbly glad,
That dash away, not draw the melting tear;
The sembling guise of joy, I hate to wear,
On the mask'd brow, each lizard change t' express;
Grief's melody, my soul will ever bear,
But, shrouded in philosophy's vain dress,
The fretting thorn will prick, tho' closed the wont egress.

Hearts are called hard, which music cannot touch,
'Tis balm for grief, when nothing will avail;
When Oscar fell, Malvina's soul was such,
On sweet sounds it faded.  But these will fail
To break mis'ry's spell, and I cannot hail
Melodious pleasure in gay saloon,
Festive bands, and artificial quire,
But in still air, and when the virgin moon
Listens with nature, and the unclogg'd soul's in tune.

'Twill little please to pore upon the past,
And vainly hope to lull the sting away,
Fresh gath'ring clouds would still more overcast,
To shade the dim light of the passing day;
Nor would it life's reluctant load allay,
E'en Lethe's fabled stream would fail to chase
Murky visions, which, graved in terror play,
Elysian views, that tempt the fond embrace,
Would fleet, and forms of spectred frenzy fill their place.

Thus sung a man of grief!  his robe was hair
Stiff with dew; 'twas said, he had tarried long,
By an ancient river, and gleaned wild fare,
Like the Seer of Eld.  He wove, in rude song,
The tangled net-work of a spirit wrong;
The quick of youth and life dull'd with ruin,
The strains whisper'd the gloomy groves among,
Ever and anon, with loud renewing,
Echo snatch'd the sounds, he, on the blast was strewing.

He look'd, though earthly, as the air were his,
And he could dart and cleave the liquid sky
With mighty wing; as though he knew that this
Clay coop, whereon he stood, held not to tie
His soul to the path, where, ambitiously
He bemean'd him to none, nor they to him,
All shunn'd the crimson glance of that broad eye
Which on the clouds of fate and mists that dim
The breasts of men, gazed unbrook'd thro' its fiery rim.

He chose his lair among the savage haunts
Of wild things, knelt at the throne of sun-rise,
And cherish'd an obduracy, no taunts
Could warp to men's wills or chase from the prize
He held in hope, and, watching the uprise
And downgoing of suns and stars, oft there
On he looked, as though he would read the skies,
And tell the dooms of men, and the proud air
Canopied him, be it, heaven were foul or fair.

They had humbled him, but obedience
Was no mood of his: &mdash; they had tried to fetter,
But who could urge the swelling spirit thence,
Which, as the snared bird's, deemeth it better
To die pecking, than be the world's debtor
In revenge, he may not pay.  O'er his fate
They had no mastery, nor charmed letter,
To make him obscure, who knew to create
His own greatness, and sought not with the weak to mate.

His mind's mansion was as a moonlit wood,
Wherein a ruin rose, and the wan rays
Sat full upon it, all else hid to sight,
Save spaces where a trem'lous glimmer plays
And flits o'er the silver'd leaves, as though fays
Did leap from branch to branch in the night's gloom
And deep obscurity, and there did raise
Fantastic things, woven in fancy's loom;
The bright, the gay, the sad, the dubious, each found room.

Of strange sort, was the language of his face,
And turbid thoughts, that fretted on his brow;
If joy had rested there, scarce alone trace
Strayed to tell it!  'Twas gone for ever now!
Yet beams like sunlight from his eyes would flow,
When scenes, long past, came rushing o'er his soul,
Turned into smiles, then shaded into woe
As the colourings of the mind unroll'd,
Some faintly imaged peace, but more of darkness told.

Oftimes the settled gaze of reverie,
Feasting on the heart's impulses and closed,
For a moment, caught its brief ecstasy,
When o'er some fancied form his spirit dozed,
And the lip's motion show'd him there reposed
In converse, which holds living things but light;
Intrusive steps impertinence imposed
To steal what he might doat on from his sight,
And snatch him where the mind's interest was but slight.

Such the Weft; who in bower that fast by lay
Aricon's ancient walls and wand'ring Wye,
On a cross bench, framed in some Gothic day,
Sung a shape of loveliness reclined nigh,
And sweet entreaty beam'd from her dark eye;
When, as oft a Cambrian harp he sought,
In sounds sunk down too low, or raised too high,
He, with too heavy load of feeling fraught,
From her most heedful murmurs a sweet rebuke caught.

The boon she begg'd of him, it was to sing
His own life's retrospect, her chosen theme,
And as in gentlest flight each sound took wing,
Gath'ring the broken fragments of a dream,
Tears, weak woman's tears, from her eyes did stream;
Drops that, on the droop'd lash, pellucid float
In friendship's doting in its deep extreme,
Twin-bred sister's looks, whose pure speech denote
The dye, that stains the heart's most crystal fount remote.

Much a pilgrim wanderer's air he had,
Dark was his face, bronzed by orient sun,
And in that garb of disappointment clad,
Of such as, woe-struck, most untimely shun
The world, ere, yet, enjoyment had begun.
He might have worn, fond wretch, a gayer mien,
The frail delight he seemed too much to mock,
The treacherous calm, that scarce could impregn
A line with light, since he had ceased to be serene.

There's an untimely autumn, a with'ring
Of soul, where evermore no verdure grows!
Pleasure moves not, neither can sorrow sting
Minds thus made callous by no common woes;
Life is track'd by a shade, that never goes
"Peel'd and scatter'd," the outcast of the nest
Tarries at the ford, for he scarcely knows
Whether to pass or plunge; &mdash; delay, at best,
Is but to wash the desert with his tears, not rest.

There's a Stygian shore, and a Dead Sea,
Which shed a mortal poison in the air,
And such the world to those who cease to be,
Or only breathe, worn with its heavy care,
All void and desert:  shelterless and bare
To him, who meets no voices on his walk,
Of love, of hope, sorrow to charm or share;
Whom spring-winds visit as a leafless stalk,
Kindling new life in things the future doth but baulk.

O yes!  'twas always felt and known too well,
That I came of that dark and fated kind,
O'er whom a hostile shade seems e'er to dwell,
And them foredoom, in all they do, to find
A malignant bar, a contrary wind,
Nor man's brightest gift, nor holiest deed,
Could thrust this bitterness of lot behind.
'Twas ever thus to strive and inly bleed
To seek, yet never find, pass onward, yet recede.

Mine that strange lot of mingled yarn has been,
Always some precarious port to find,
Where scarce 'gan ever peace to intervene,
But some demon planet did move between,
And chase me back to terror and chagrin,
Suffer'd of joy and woe to tread the brink,
By viewless fates that frown by turns and screen
The wretch, whose torment is the surf to drink,
Above whose foam he cannot rise, and may not sink.

The haughty spirit, shunn'd by all the world,
Is lone, destitute, yet so fully free,
That, alway buoyant, wheresoever hurl'd,
It mounts anew, to frown contemptuously:
Nor fate, nor love, nor hate can e'er decree
To it one rooted lot, but, lone and shy,
It mocks the world's ties, and seeks not to see
Its name blown in whisper'd ignominy,
Or tale of common breath, or fame but fann'd to die.

I stand here, as a thing that knoweth all,
Yet known to none, cursed with the eagle soul
Of song, and versed in much, that doth appal
The meek breast, and it calmeth me to roll
Mine eye o'er fairy vale and gentle knoll,
Where can come forth the free, at large, to prowl,
And slowly meditate the future goal,
Present vapidness, the past bitter bowl
Of springs, where lips have pressed to find the waters foul.

The falcon fierce, that quarries in the air,
Makes wing to rocks, and slumbers o'er the flood,
Seething with a spirit, that cannot pair
With all, and most is nursed in breasts that brood
O'er their own loneliness, and, in their mood
Of savageness, soar, whence they best survey
The stripling foe, that them befits for food;
And, glancing true where lies the fore-right way,
Pierce the blue air, and downwards dart upon their prey.

I have lov'd to range among the mountains,
To tower in mute magnificence of thought,
Where nature all her mighty pomp sustains,
And rock and druid wood, full oft, I've sought,
Whate'er uncouth was, or gorgeously wrought,
And topmost mountain, whence the eye-ball strains
O'er the heap't majesties of earth, remains
Of worlds, where solitude, in her proud dearth
Of life, broods like an exile o'er a plague-swept hearth.

Infancy!  first infirmity of life!
The day spring's burst unmantled by a cloud!
No feature mark'd, as yet, with future strife,
No worm in cave, nor wretch amid a crowd,
No dream of passion born for aye to shroud
The languid smile in thoughtful lines of care;
The future villain, and the tyrant proud,
Voiceless, supine, alike, reposing, wear
The Creator's look serene ling'ring in their air.

But who can tell of that impassive day
When of all unconscious, scarce a trace remain
Fleeting in soft vacuity away,
Slumbers dreamless from pleasure or from pain:
Much have I envied the innocuous look
The pleased infant gives to his mother's gaze,
The look, which the Paphian boy-god took
Of Psyche, when she clung to his embrace,
And both stood deathless models of exquisite grace.

Hast thou not beheld a twin'd lovely pair,
Disporting lightsome o'er their earthly way,
Wing'd visitants, with loosely flying hair,
Bestrewing flowers in their heedless play?
No flesh of earth, no mortal infants they!
But one is Fortune, call'd &mdash; the other, Love:
Happy is he, to whose bowers they stray,
And courts the smile of either gentle dove,
For beauty's brows they wreath with chaplets from above,

Quick past the germ of infancy, the hours,
Childhood fleets on with other dreams of bliss,
Flight of butterfly o'er vernal flowers,
The mother's neck no longer circling, this
Meets no more feasting smile and kindred kiss,
Thought expands the mind, and brilliant green,
In slow gradations of hope's varied charms,
Tints the far horizon; youth, sketch'd between,
With illusory shapes, bedecks the distant scene.

In the youth of years it was sweet to rove,
Pleased with the lively sport and gaudy toy,
Full of wild fancy, and pervading love,
Stung with insect vexings, that scarce annoy;
Bounding o'er the greensward, with tread of joy,
To pluck the wild rose and inhale the breeze;
Eager to rifle every rude delight,
Thoughtless, perchance, what would arise to seize
Retribution, and life in its fast current freeze.

Childhood has its changes, and youth comes o'er
Half manhood, life's intellectual morn,
In each stage, the present goes to deplore
The law, that, from the budding to the fall
Nothing last loved shall seen be as before.
Truth, knowledge, ye may be too early guests,
Too soon some, perchance I, in thirst of lore,
Quaff'd the many streams with increasing zests,
But Heaven fails not less to deal its stern behests.

Yet these were days, when life might well have ceased,
In rose-lipp'd glee my flowing heart would swell
In gratitude for what my Maker pleased.
Curiosity, sateless, to thy spell,
Angel fiend!  we owe our heaven or hell.
Such wish but gratified, impels the rage,
But we may not part, join'd, alas, too long,
Though too much taught by thee, the letter'd page
Shall ever with its charm my willing eyes engage.

O why is wisdom thus as Eden's fruit,
The rage to taste it but the serpent's lure,
That coils, tempting, deceitful, at the root
Hiding the curse of that which seems so pure.
Few live, endow'd therewith, serene, secure.
It was forbidden!  Man has bought it dear,
Pale face, eye hollow, wrinkles premature.
And, even gained, it suits him ill to wear,
Oft worse than vileness is his chequer'd lot to bear.

Mind marks the noble from the vulgar herd!
There the gross tread not, nor the mean pursue;
Whom fame, passion, genius never spurr'd
To strength of vision in their mental view,
But, in darkness, are ever doom'd to brew
Their small contentions, and their sordid hates;
Fated, weed-like, at last, to die and strew
The earth, sole memorial of their fates
Oblivion, insatiate glutton, the rest awaits.

To foil the plume upon the victor's brow,
To damp young merit in its modest rise,
Is theirs:  over a noble fall to glow,
And vanity's light trumpetings to prize
Cheering folly to mortify the wise.
In their eyes no virtue is save power,
Reverence but servility or fear,
Emulous but the joy of youth to sour,
And slow ascending scan of worth to overpower.

All hail!  ye hills of deepest, darkest blue!
Your Alp-like summits, steep and shaggy sides,&mdash;
Ye, that speak to me of "lang syne" anew,
How the reft heart, beguiled awhile, still prides
It upon its own lov'd clime:  who derides
The scenes of home, and youth, and joy, and life,
The blithe laughs, fleeting hours, the quicker strides
Of time:  these have mingled in all my strife
Like sacred balsam in the scar of venom'd knife.

I stand once more, where man scarce holds a sway,
To mate with bloom, vale, mountain, sky, and cloud;
To squander life with wild things, and obey
No will but self, save the innermost shroud,
That shadows o'er and quells the spirit proud;
My harp's awake to sing to every scene,
Its notes float on the cool breeze, and aloud
Blend with solitude, and usurp the green
Vale far, tho' the woodbird's wild note doth intervene.

They say there's sweetness that will steal its way
Into men's hearts, and melt their fierceness down
Like siren songs, that come o'er wavy spray
From sea-rocks, and warble the fearful frown
Into milky softness and nerveless swoon;
But ne'er could I conciliate, and turn
Sweet metre-monger, charm'd as by the moon,
For spirits free were ever wont to spurn
Flattery's guilt-taught cringe, and thoughts that never burn.

'Tis sweet to him, who bends his steps to home,
And for awhile his weary wandering ends,
Through the remember'd tracks of youth to roam,
And tell where every tree stood, as he wends,
Sighing o'er the wing'd days and scenes, it rends
His tongue to utter.  Nought inanimate,
But to crowded memory something lends,
Which, heretofore, had mingled in his fate,
And fill'd out the past record of his love or hate.

The tongueless language in the sight of home
The wordless music in a native sound
Bestow an aliment to those who roam,
Like the milk-tree, on the far sea-shore found,
Pouring its nurture from an inward wound;
Symbols of days, which deep impression took,
Welcome to him, who thirsts on barren ground
Th' affections of the woods, the maze of brook
And mead, in sweet apparel, reads he as a book.

In the dilated scenes, where minds dilate
Beyond the verbal boundaries of thought,
In their sublimity there is a state
Of grandeur, with a peace not found, though sought
In all the pomp where gilded ease is bought:
Nature, in her magnificence not loud,
Proclaims not greatness with a deafening shout,
She shuns the vulgar spirit of the proud,
The brief fame, and frothy turbulence of the crowd.

Vaga!  it cools my brow to gaze thy wave,
And all the humid landscape on its face,
The trem'lous earth seeming as if to lave
And float on thy clear mirror, and pinnace
Fleet, whose small helm disparts the stream apace,
Lightly impell'd its destined course to gain,
With wave before, behind a long drawn trace,
The near slope, green-wood, turret, temple, fane
Linger for placidness to settle there again.

O, thou hast been a charm unto my life!
Thy summer's sunshine sooth'd me when I sighed
To revel like a mad sea in man's strife,
And war with all his frowarduess and pride;
Sated with his hated commerce, denied
The all that joys or elevates the heart,
E'en then I felt thy voiceless stillness glide
Bland as the oil into the stranger's smart
There is a balm, which only scenes like thine impart.

There are flowers, first and fairest of the year,
And haunts that steal the spirit to their side,
Of the circling margent the waters near
Sweep the green solitude with rushing pride,
As glory speeds and will not be denied:
Whilome I anchor'd oft at west'ring hour,
My wicker boat unto the willows tied,
Above my harp to hang, my head embower,
And sit me down o'er wave and song and scene to pore.

Each hill top steals some mead's white blossom'd view,
Some boon of nature, some lovely valley,
Some break of wide expanse that bursts anew
On th' astounded eye, light spire, or galley
Falling down the Wye, and life will rally
To commune with this.  O'er yon tall turret
And hazle copse the scant rays last tarry,
And in that eve-like peace who would regret
Like Jura's Vaucluse's hermits to pay life's debt.

Scarce a blue bee, that sucks within a reed,
Nor humid alder leaning from the bank,
Nor, on shingled shallows, a huddling greed,
Floating like Latona's tresses, nor lank
Water-loving flag, nor withe's flexile rank,
But thereon are reflected with a hue
More soft, and, as nesh gold fish in a tank,
The finny race, in the clear wave, pursue
The wind strew'd fly, that flutters into sudden view.

Day and night sever in the firmament;
An arch is built by glory with a chain
Of damask-skirted clouds, and, to his tent
Of glitt'ring topaz, leaps the sun again
To chase the canopying dusk, and stain
The distant lake, and steep, and mountain mist
With that soft red the rose is said to feign;
Or the retiring cheek, when first 'tis kist,
Which with its scarlet woos the crime it would resist.

The mould'ring town, that clambers up the hill;
Seen afar, where, though man's society
And mind aim but a petty space to fill,
They are discolour'd with a sorry dye
And shallow grasp!  'Tis easy to descry
The little ranklings of the serpent taint,
Though, asp-like, prone beneath the leaf to lie:
Thus man in solitudes is least a saint,
The soul lacks lustre in barrenness and restraint.

You monarch trees, with leafy arms so wide,
Upward spread to clasp the heavenward spire,
And rock and brake, at eve, are deeply dyed
With the dark Indu's god's reflected fire:
And all the current wears the bright attire.
Through the glittering waves the ferry boats ply,
And fishes leap by anglers gladly spied
Beings of light flit through the vesper sky,
And all the gloaming breathes forth wildest minstrelsy.

The high arch'd bridge and Wilton's fossy walls,
Unruin'd, front the meadow's green deck'd mound,
The wood-fringed vale afar the river calls,
In haste, with many a loud tumbling bound,
From Cambria, that spreads her zone around
Of mountains blue, yet leaves the eye to range,
Ere on Hattrell the golden sun's discrown'd,
O'er passing scene with many colour'd change,
Beguiling the enamour'd eye with rapture strange.

In wood embosom'd o'er the flood's reclin'd,
In hoary majesty, the shatter'd wall,
Oft, up the sudden steep, the Weft hath climb'd,
To gaze with boyhood's gaze the river's brawl,
With store of hills and crags, that much appal,
Dun mantling woods, loveliest on the height,
The small secluded vale sweetest of all,
Mountains bluely shadowing from the sight,
In rich tiaras capp'd of purplish golden light.

It were a pleasant and a gladsome scene,
Old Goodric's ferry, rope, and rippling bay,
The water's circling sweep, the jutty screen
Of the vassal hills, the serene display
Of the far fertile meads, in summer day,
The ruin red, engirt in beauty's arms,
The steep and hoar peak distant far and grey,
What time, ere Zephyr its young bloom alarms,
The hyacinth's blue haze floats o'er the wood's green charms.

Talbot!  that word was panic to a foe,
And charm and terror unto all save her,
Who, though young and timid as the wild doe,
Grappled half saint, half Amazon in war,
And fell a murder'd trophy at the car
Of fiendish craft, and stake of bloody zeal:
Hero or heroine, no frame can mar
Your destinies, ye do but break the seal
Of things &mdash; the wizard fate decrees you to reveal.

The summer martlet delving the red bank,
The swift chasing with microscopic eye,
Cairns and huts, in steep irregular rank,
With the blue foxbell roof'd, and lush ivy,
The winter torrent's track all scoop'd awry,
The shade of spreading boughs, the garden's sheen
Tricking out the gay earth's diversity,
The woodman's axe, heard in the deep ravine,
The mouth-fill'd fox tripping o'er silvan fence unseen.

The luscious vale green with the virgin blade
Of peering corn and grass, the small abodes
Of rural men tree-girt, the teeming glade
With toil of patient husbandry, &mdash; the loads
Of vernal bloom, which fruitage full forebodes,
The wood-crown'd Chase and distant village spire
Fill the full view, Pomona's so array'd,
The vane blazoning in the sky its fire,
The south wind wafting fragrance o'er the earth's attire.

A shelving grove bedecks the sloping mount,
Whose murm'ring branches dial their long shades
Athwart the mead, over the Wye a fount
Winds into a "brook of willows," there wades
The heifer, and, with saunt'ring limbs, evades
The blood-gorg'd breese:  trampling in the rushes,
Where crane and bittern wet the wintry wing,
She scares the blue halcyon from the bushes,
The wave reflects the wanderer as it gushes.

Time was they held them to this ancient house,
Whose silent ruin crowns the scenic vale,
And the bugled call echoed far to rouse
To sanguinary feud or rich regale;
How oft, would I fancifully bewail,
To have been unborn, when courteous knight
Sighed for fair ladies' love, and sweet salute,
And, o'er the hills, on prancing steed took flight,
In quest of adventure strange and perilous fight.

See that waking eye, the gaunt tiger's spring
Lurks beneath its winning kindliest glance,
See the lip, 'tis a swelling quiv'ring thing;
But, see it so, and dare thou then advance,
Weapons, though like not olden Celtic lance,
Would shew thy imperious soul, from whence
A spirit emanates, that may not brook
Lux'ry's abject bribe, a planter's presence,
But desperately free repel the menace hence.

The lion paws the woods, the tiger prowls,
Around these rugged hills arise a race,
Untamed their tempers, and unswerv'd their souls,
Whom pride and polish could not yet debase,
Nor they the curb with vile consent embrace;
They frown nor pale not at slow merit's praise,
Nor shun the virtue at which tyrants scowl,
Nor the goading sneer at genius raise,
Nor hide their honest hatred, where it well may blaze.

The boys listen with much delighted ear,
The old narrate with undiminish'd fire
The deeds which did their ancient sires revere,
And seem'd bequeath'd race after race t' inspire
With hereditary gift of parent ire;
The mountain storks, which brow these hills around,
Breathe not the breath of them that tow'r not higher
Than the flat walk of tame and lowly ground
And scenes, in wild affray and battle unrenown'd.

Thou wert a prop of tyranny and war,
I mock at thee, Old Goodric, shatter'd pile!
To liberty they meant thee for a bar,
And thou art fall'n.  So let all that would defile
The freedom of this fair glorious isle;
There are caitiff knaves, whose deadly slaver
May fiercely foam o'er this; let them revile,
Some hearts yet are stout, that will not waver,
When the gory arm again is bared, to save her.

Can they conquer, and drag thee to the dust,
No!  this, for a warning, e'en echoes No!
Where tyranny's crest felt the fickle gust,
And waved its brand but briefly to and fro;
Liberty's proud bird may ev'n meet a blow,
And droop, as if infected by the air,
But 'tis his nature to revive and glow,
Though down awhile, and urge his lofty dare,
Grapple the foe of man, and strip his fell plumes bare.

His wing may be clipt, but a pinion
Grows out of it, that will as soon beget
A renewing life, and dash the minion
That dared the foul outrage on him; the debt
In blood is paid, and funereal jet;
The royal bird, in his majestic woes,
May quench the eye, where ire doth hooded set,
But all the slumbers of his perch'd repose
Extinguish not his smother'd rage, &mdash; it does but doze.

Though they held a sorcerer's charm, in sooth,
The love of freedom to make dim and dull,
Yet there lives a most vital germ in truth,
That impregnates the great mind to the full
With its sacred fervour, and such will cull
The gourd, that suits its dainty appetite;
'Spite of the despot's discipline or rule
The rock shall split beneath that beak of might,
And ope the adamantine way of human right.

Through the low cullis, ling'ring on the moat
And archway grim, with antique ivy spread,
The rusty walls the tints of time denote,
And silence, such as reigns amid the dead;
When o'er the frowning mighty pile we tread
Through crumbling tower, or fearful dungeon dark,
We deem where some chevalier hath bled,
For hate of blood, in his best days a mark
To glut revenge, at one "fell swoop" a founder'd bark.

'Tis not all a dream for it thrills like truth,
And that thin graceful one, with hawk in fist,
Seems some envied lover, or captive youth,
Whose encaged form, till kill'd by woe, must list
To her sad ditty who had boding mist,
The courteous smile, and greeting hour of love
Language meet which the fair can least resist
Their summer walks late as the waters rove
Beneath the pale moonlight, o'er mountain foot above.

Nature's mine idol!  these old walls for me
Had charms which lured my evening steps away,
To set free that full tide of melody,
Whose blissful current none hath power to stay,
So like another world's is its brief play;
Oft, at night watch, screen'd in ladies' tower,
The jackdaw tenants of its mournful day
Have warn'd me from their night nestling bower,
Cloyed with the dewy breathings of the wild wallflower.

How full and pensive came then o'er the boughs
The far oar, the bargeman's clamour, and song
Of the lone milker, sat amid her cows,
And the daws shrill clatter the walls along,
As o'er the towers the blackwing'd tenants throng,
The golden luxury of the summer hour,
Of hue so bright, and mutable, and long,
The thousand feather'd throats which mingling pour
Forth gladdest harmony, chasing the glitt'ring shower.

Thou wreck of time, in ivy's green embrace!
May Spring's young charms thy lonesome age surround.
All but wild things, as desolate of race,
Screech owls, sprites, that haunt melancholy ground,
Fly the desecrated walls:  with night crown'd,
Or breezy moonlight's fickle spectred ray,
Piercing broken tower each mystic sound,
Fear augurs orison of wizard gray,
Or helm'd ghost of chieftain, who loves therein to stray.

Hill o'er hill, till all is lost in blue,
The upreared peak, narrow and huge and steep,
Opposing its red to the soothing hue
Of greener things, which all about it creep,
So sweet scions from rugged births do peep;
The gold and purple of the heath and broom,
Rills that between the gaping chasms weep,
The sombre grandeur of the green wood's gloom,
And foliage pendent o'er nooks of livelier bloom.

Here dwelt progenitors of one who held
Men in best fellowship, in ties of love
Or hate; whose jeers a swarm of foes dispell'd,
And down-dashed all beside him or above,
And stood prepared giant or gnat to move,
But he grew misanthrope from men's malice,
And bitter sense that he so vainly strove;
Unweeting there is mind too high to rise,
That swift climbing needs coward's heart and reptile's eyes.

He died at top, this giant of his time,
Dispenser of quick poison to his foe;
Who of any made a nation's pastime,
But on the oak grafted not the willow,
Nor saintly bent his knee before his toe,
Though he had the ways of men yclept morose,
There was a method, and withal a glow
Of grace that knit the love of women close,
And grasped the tim'rous victims in a fatal noose.

He had the guileful gaze, and words, and smiles,
Which wind their serpent way to woman's heart.
None such mysteries may solve, but, doubtless, wiles
They are deemed by maids who have felt the smart
Of such deceitful, yet prevailing, art;
Men be, who ill can stoop to win the prize,
And hold themselves from lovers' snares apart,
Yet, those though they in haughty speech despise,
The cloak'd destruction beams from their radiant eyes.

Close to a hill's huge back recedes a nook,
Where the Wye burrows deep in the red rock,
A bent aged man with decrepid look,
Ferried a crazed boat, which had felt the shock
Of kindred years; the whole was a choice stock
Of congruous features; the dead dark slack,
The hov'ring shades, slimy shore, strewed with block
On block of land-slipt brecchia, the drear lack
Of life-like show, imaged the fabled Stygian track.

And he, that aged man, with time-bleached hair,
Adown his shoulders rudely strayed, seem'd meet
To match those sombre harmonies; he bare
The look of one who ne'er had urged his feet
Far from that spot; oft as he left his' seat,
His cable to a tree's stump tied, to climb
He 'gan; but, on his paddle, turn'd to greet
The one place, where the simple lapse of time
Had grav'd but one picture on manhood, youth, and prime.

The dull roar of forges in the hollow,
Th' unresting cataract and its hoarse fall,
The steep wooded pyramids that follow
The Wye of waters, and shadow o'er all
With each tint that the fickle sky doth pall,
The giant leaps, and space from pile to pile,
The grey peaks belted in green boughs, the call
Of the crag lifted gazer to revile,
With echoed taunts, the kite that sails across with guile.

'Tis sweet to wander o'er the blue-bell'd hill,
Though bleakly sterile, steep, and sternly rear'd,
And gaze the distant hill-tops bluer still,
And full many an ancient hall rever'd,
Or weird spot by tradition past endear'd,
Meet nursery of Monmouth's infant king,
Girded with heart of pride and steely beard;
On nook like this his soul might trim to wing
To Gallic deeds of dare and conquest's crimson sting.

Yet oft a simple, fair, and artless child
Has cradled here upon a gorse-strown bed,
And grown to womanhood both meek and mild,
With lips, that thirsted not the bowl of red,
Nor sought with murder fellest fiend to wed,
But, twinn'd sister to lone mountain flower,
Trembled timidly to the breeze that fled
O'er her path, in reserv'd untimely hour,
And starting, at footfall strange, besought her bower.

The toppling crag, the deep and shadowy glen,
The rest serene of the water-fretted vale,
Scarce trampled with the troubled feet of men,
And earth all motion in the southern gale,
The flocks that on the mountain's sides regale,
The apparition of the aerial bow,
In me, the hermit of this willowed dale,
Have nursed the vocal thought's o'erflowing flow,
The sleepless dream's soft stir, and full heart's igneous glow.

And here and there lone haunt and far deer track
Lead on to mountain pass and wolfish wild,
Where, of yore, the mail'd Norman's brindled pack
Came baying down, by sport and prey beguiled,
Scene for ghost and wandering thing reviled,
At night, the motley bird, with horrid screech,
To whoos athwart from black wood's side to side
And lights on bones that lie untomb'd to bleach,
Of things which crawl to die where human feet scarce reach.

Vale of tombs!  as if nought was wanted here
To provide the chasm solitude had left
But death, and, when wanted, doth there appear
Crowning all:  nature's spirit felt bereft,
Till she had fix'd her trophy in this cleft,
'Mid waves and shadows, ruin and dun rocks,
And she made it, though a murderous theft;
'Tis said, a water spirit wrings her locks,
When this her monument partakes the tempest's shocks.

If there's a choice where we would wish to die,
'Tis here!  'tis sad, and suited to the soul
That shuns the popular woe and vulgar tie
Of common life and men:  no village knoll
Of passing bell, nor momentary toll,
Were so discrete as the chafed stream's murmur,
And the madder wind's reverberate roll
O'er the redoubled hills, without the stir
Of human breath to wake an ill-betimed demur.

Here he, perchance, who sought the stream to die,
May mingle with the murmur of the scene,
And wing o'er, where the waves flow liquidly
The space of melancholy glens between,
And craggy Yat erects his hoary screen,
There, reposed in cloud embodied gloom,
The slender shade o'er dark abyss may lean,
Suiting his dwelling to his sullen doom,
The cutting off of youthful days, and manly bloom.

In those deep hollow'd Cyclopian dells,
Like the brown relics of Paestum's ruin,
Rocky columns, semblance of hidden cells,
As if the form of chivalry, brewing
O'er past neglect, there implacably dwells,
Giant cairns, peeping through clust'ring wood, rent
By tempest; in May robes the vistas swell,
And Wye's grieved stops, like vocal instrument
Or sounding shell, their melancholy murmurs vent.

There are blue lightnings in the vernal sky,
Whose sight repelling strokes flash forth a sphere
Of fire, and blind the all astounded eye
With the forked and arrowy torrent, ere
The aching ball can quick collapse in fear
Of death, and, close behind, the horrid peal,
Like crash of precipice or mountain near,
Bursts as the bolt of Jove was feign'd to deal
The Titan's end, and leave a void of darkness drear.

I saw the huge rock vibrate on its base,
And held communion in the dread wood,
In forest rude, where echo loves to chase
The croaking birds of death, whose scaring brood
Shriek baleful when a fated form hath stood
Upon the cairn, and show'd a fair carouse
Of future spoil and fresh carrion food;
And from the dried fount follow'd far the browze
Of tinkling wether, where the herbage scantly grows.

Ye barkless oaks, whose dying heads uprise
On unbranch'd trunks desolate on the heath,
Ye shaggy vales, where innocuous dies
The forest flower, all unknown in death,
Save to the kiss of Amaryntha's breath,
Ye brambled banks, that skirt the brawling burn,
Whose waters black all hoarsely on beneath,
Ye dreary wastes, that know no living turn,
Save when the summer's green yields to the perish'd fern.

The shaggy mane of things untam'd, the bell
That sounds the sauntering herd not stray'd,
Human forms that no human culture tell;
And silence ceaseless save where swift hound bay'd,
And hunter horsed his bugle shrilly play'd,
Orpheus of loneliest wood and dale,
The scarlet train for the far chase array'd,
Bounding from oaken croft into the vale,
Furtive fox or dismay'd doe leap the thicket's pale.

How in the blossom'd bosom of the hill,
Out peeping from the lavish bloom of May,
The yellow broom, sad birch, and smoking kiln,
And cottage white amid the close array
Of silvan things, are scatter'd wild and stray,
The hawthorn black, and tree of man's first fall,
Spread their far seen flower at dawn of day,
Hang o'er the upland bank and moss-grown wall,
And eye of musing hind with promis'd store enthral.

Spring all verdure, with an emerald's green,
Glittering in the ray, and foliage
Light as down of swan, with a vernal sheen
And tenderness, like beauty's infant age,
Just ope'd enough affection to engage,
The cuckoo's note from the scarce feather'd tree,
Heaven its song-loft, and the world its cage,
Insects humming in every blade and free,
Fill'd with life, flitting in the sunshine frolicly.

The green meeting of mountain and of mead,
The wave of flow'r and forest in the breeze,
The craggy steep whereon the wild flocks feed,
The coral berried ash, and broad leaft trees
Bending from rock to rock, as the leaves seize
The harlot wind which turns them o'er and o'er
With changeful hue, and seeming much to teaze
The flaunting woer, the cat'ract's hoarse roar,
The sun-chased shadows which fleet o'er the wood-tops soar.

Here the strawberry's fain to choose its bed,
In summer days, upon the sidelong hill,
The snowy white and pure unpainted red
Braving sharp mountain air and passing chill,
Though the stranger's tenderest tread would kill
And crush its form, reckless of the sad harm,
As foul seducer of the wanton ill
Of robbing maiden honour of its charm,
Tuning to gall the breast that cherish'd love too warm.

If e'er thou rollest o'er on cloud serene,
O Bard of Selma!  thou might'st here regale
Thy eyes with the semblance of such a scene,
As thine own notes have woven into tale,
A blue stream winding through a bright green vale,
The vale of giants, lucid as a vein
Running and branching with a tender wail
Huge Doward and his rival mountain train
Press steeply round her, and their haughty loves sustain.

Kymin and Doward cinctured with the cairn,
The wood-cap'd Chase and Malvern's deep blue host,
The cool narrow valley fringed with the fern,
The glistering wave seen by turns and lost,
Like sheet of pearl in emerald embost,
The moist ground tint of the red mountain weed,
And to and fro the lofty wood-tops tost;
Slumb'ring echo, from the dead hollow freed,
O'er Monnow's thronging mounts responds the tuneful reed.

Flowerless be that bosom and forlorn,
Of him who quits the soul benumbing crowd,
With dewy tread, o'er vale and hill-top borne
Feels not the lib'ral soul wing high and proud,
Where distant blue and mountain shadows shroud
The deep dales:  obscured by an earthly cloud,
He with nature may not converse aloud,
Nor homeward bear, with honey-laden wing,
The glee of bird, and breeze, and gentlest living thing.

Nature's fair, fickle in her sundry casts,
Her beauty's witch'ry's like the lambent fire,
Which, seen in th' infant's eye, a moment lasts,
And, in that moment, quells the fiercest ire:
Thro' all my shames, she taught me to aspire
Above them, in the language, and deep power
Of suns, and stars, and spangled vault of fire,
And wind, and wave, and tree, and flower,
All things that above man majestically tower.

Long may we wander through the haunts of men,
But never in our thwarted travel find
The sought-for semblance of the kindred soul,
Whose fate unto ours we could gladly bind,
In the dew of youth, framed as 'twere to wind
Around us, wet with an all-healing tear;
This fellow part, scarce figur'd yet divin'd,
Through life's lessening shade will oft appear
To hover with a noiseless wing, yet never near.

There float the most mellifluous of smells,
When summer skies have wept upon the earth,
Filling the glist'ning heather's pale blue bells,
And wetting the bow'd green-sward and droopt birch,
The bird dividing from his leafy perch,
The chorus of the vesper jubilee,
The song'd wanderers rapt and wood-bound search.
When the o'er-rolling darkness 'gins to flee,
And through the cleft clouds darts the sun rejoicingly.

Oh!  let the water rage against the rock,
The broken shelves, that, rugged in their course,
Impede the current, which with gentle mock,
Like taunting fair one, turns aside perforce,
Spurning unwelcome love with scolding hoarse,
From the fond hinderance, as loth to stay,
Far off she gaily winds without remorse,
Sunk in the vale's embrace, with gentle lay
She 'gins her practis'd prate, and sweetly wanton play.

The toil of drudging bargemen on the banks,
Rude shouts, and plash of cords upon the stream,
The sail lessening through the woods, the slow ranks
With helmsman at the rudder, and small seam
Length'ning from behind, all stirring the dream,
Of the spectator, Jaques of the spot,
Blending the dead and living in the scheme
Of his morality, each in its lot
And order conferring a beauty or a blot.

Each little reed reclining from the bank,
Each willow wooer bending o'er the flood,
And oak supreme do homage to her rank,
And guard her scallop'd sides like subjects good.
He, who erst on the margent high bath stood,
Has seen, in murmur low or sullen roar,
Her stream now calm, and now in darker mood
Come down a wintry torrent like the Boor
Of many a careless Wight the deep undoer.

'Tis grand above the shattered arch to rest,
And see the cover'd valley all a sea,
The willow tops by the swoln waters prest,
Like storm-beat furrows, as boisterously
Whirls the surge in maniac majesty,
Spoil on spoil, wave on wave, like battle's crowds:
And, as o'er granite piled unto the sky,
The round pale moon peeps o'er the broken clouds,
And shews the rapid barge, dim forms, and sable shrouds.

'Tis evening!  scarce the waters seem to flow,
And such warm hues as thro' the tinted pane
Of rev'rend arch stream on the tombs below,
Dilate from behind yon antique fane,
And glow, tho' doom'd to fade, un-doom'd to wane;
There is no thought that is not solemn now,
And few who long not for such thoughts again,
The ripple is shot with a crimson glow
And night from the hills descends with her moorish brow.

The soft departure of a blessed day,
The euthanasy of a glorious sun,
The yellow'd leaves yellower for the ray,
The sounds that into tender octaves run,
Floating on the stream from some hidden one,
Invoking sky, and earth, and woods afar,
With her night hymn's deep hallowing tone,
That we might deem alit, did fate not bar,
A sky-winged watcher from an ethereal car.

Nay, hush!  wake not such fatal music now,
For death that falling sweetness seems to bring,
And still the blood to a more feeble flow,
And to the sinking soul's last feelings cling:
So, like to sudden glad, unhop'd, undreamt
Ecstasy and death may speed on the same wing,
Like the circean witchcraft wont to tempt
The wanderer to the share, where never thing
Alit, but felt in swoons of joy all life exempt.

Now glows the bright volcano of the west!
The mountain tops are molten into rays,
And once again, ere glory sinks to rest,
Th' illuminated woods beseech the blaze
And woo the warm tints to their leafy maze;
The stream doth seem betrothed to the sun;
Who like a lover comes to her embrace
Ere he goes, and, as the last moments run,
He drops upon her breast like some enamour'd one.

The silver glitter of the eve is shed
Along the mountain's loosened crag-girt side,
And turns to liquid light the winding bed
Of waters.  Where the ceaseless currents glide
Through green glossed vales to join the ocean tide,
And broad-leav'd sallows weave a canopy
To shade the stream as lover fans the bride,
'Twas sweet to sit and see the bright orb die,
Alway loveliest when his departure's nigh.

There's a most luscious languor in the eve,
A refining calm, when we watch the while
Shadow and light alternately bereave
Both night and day of beauty, like a smile
From love in grief, its charm without its guile,
Or, as when from a dark Madonna's head,
The dropt lid lifts and blazons forth a file
Of rays, through glossy locks, whose raven flow
Are lavished and parted o'er her illumined brow.

I stood within a wood's recesses deep,
Whose pomp of trees reclined unto a lake;
O'er the foliage scarce a wind did creep,
But the sun's twinklings glimmer'd through a brake,
Which, though night sat round, day within did make,
The more their parting beauty to seclude,
And, save the pheasant's call or lake-fowl's wake,
Nought on that silvan worship did intrude,
To break the wood choir's melodious interlude.

Where root and branch fantastic wove a way,
A path led on to the Egerian sheet,
Which seem'd, as a well-framed mirror, to lay
Itself out, and on it the eye did meet
The o'er-arch'd foliage in picture sweet,
Ever and anon, where the broad shade ran,
A fish the osiers shook, but nought did greet
The eye beside, save a lone aged swan
Which survived his mate to grieve the unequal span.

O, thou day-god!  that from the westward streams,
Like as thy rise is thy departure bright
O'er the sunny welkin the sparkling beams
Awhile, till sky and earth are clad with night,
Linger yet, ye wanderers, who delight,
Enamour'd of the nightingale, to rove;
Soul tuned to the tender calm of twilight,
Sung to ravishment in the lonely grove,
Weaving the frail spun web of fairy bliss and love.

The best, most solitary chords of all,
That move the spirit of the distant ear,
Are sounds of bells, that on the water fall,
Or the more solemn dirge, that would appear
To mount with some soul, from the body clear,
And grow so distant as at last to cease
When touch'd to the blood, we would wish it near,
And strain to catch the words, the thrills that please,
But the sounds of another world we may not seize.

There's a time at evening's fitful close,
If any feel the arrowy pang of grief,
Though he win no rapture, may breathe repose,
Or, worn with sadness, find a mild relief,
Like all the world's dream't joy, divine, but brief,
The gross sensations of our being fly,
In the solemn stillness we feel as if
It then were sweet like heaven's light to die,
Beguiled, in delusion's half pain, half ecstasy.

To fill th' hollow of th' indefinite hour
When the gladdest of life's rills have flow'd away,
And none replenish'd ripple past our bow'r
Reflecting th' image of a better day,
Lotus like, 'twere sweet t' open and array
Th' o'erblown blossom, when the earth's aspect
As if an angel-garment clothed its clay
Momently in a brightness is bedeckt,
Which as the ship, sinks swiftly, in a deep calm wreckt.

On Cambria's hills, the night is falling,
Isles of gold along the west are sailing,
The bird of night to his mate is calling,
The nightingale's in the holly wailing,
The sun seems loth to sink, one short ling'ring
Within the wood-walk's o'ershadowing screen,
Ere I flutter on the reluctant wing,
And alight where this peace has sever been,
And come what may, henceforward ne'er can be, I ween.

Farewell awhile!  thou much belov'd, 'tis night!
From her car, borne by the cold dewy breeze,
She shakes foul air with the thickening light,
And blackly glides amid' yon dusky trees,
'Tis the hour, that drowsy things love to seize
For sleep, the half death, palsy of the breast,
Imparts to some the all they know of ease,
When jaundic'd by fixt woe, they sink opprest
Into muttering, starting, fitful, partial rest.

We have beheld the same sun rise and set,
And sports and scenes elapse, too sweet to last,
Fit they could be, how much must both forget,
That comes now as comes the autumnal blast,
To sere the latest leaves, and wing them fast:
Yes, there are days, when dreams seem truth sincere,
And light fring'd clouds scarce darken when o'ercast,
Days, when we are free from all future fear,
Days, when to-day is as to-morrow, bright and clear.

Welcome then the visions of thy young heart,
Still reposing on friendships that have been,
Hoarded memories, which it keeps apart,
Like a lucid fountain bubbling within
Its lone cave, away from the dross and din
Around, laving nor mingling with the soil
It filters through, let us look back to will
From hence a joy the future cannot foil,
A cord the past lapse of time never can uncoil.

In those, our days of melody and tune,
We made our banquet with a quicker sense,
A sense, which was our youth's voluptuous boon
To trace out young joys, and create from thence
A colour the most lasting and intense;
In our mutual bond I now rejoice
Alike the scenes &mdash; the sports &mdash; the days &mdash; from whence
We stole and squander'd both the self-same voice
Of things, all of one tone, one semblance, and one choice.

Though all that we may feel, be but a part
Of that we have felt, it may well suffice
To sooth and soften many a new smart
To pluck the spirit's pain and oft entice
To repose, years but add unto the price
Of what has been, and words will e'en renew,
Pure and unsullied, or with stain or vice
The warm reflection of that backward view
Freshen'd in our thoughts, like flowers in ev'ning dew.

