Deep murky midnight, o'er the sleeping world
The horrors of her gloomy empire spread;
And raging winds, with rushing fury hurl'd,
Heav'd pond'rous ocean from its rocky bed;
The mingling elements convulsive roar
Was heard tremendous far along the wave-worn shore!
But when the saffron-tinctur'd dawn appear'd,
And with her presence Nature's aspect cheer'd,
Upon a bold, projecting cliff was seen,
With pensive attitude, and thoughtful mien,
BRITANNIA'S graceful and majestic form,
Viewing the devastation of the recent storm.

"Behold!  (the mild, benignant Genius cried)
What floating wrecks deform the angry main,
As fierce Bellona lays a nation's pride
In mangled carnage o'er th' ensanguin'd plain.
Returning morn has bid the tempest cease,
Oh!  may destructive War thus yield to lovely Peace."
With elevated eyes she breath'd the prayer,
When lo!  descending thro' the ambient air,
A radiant vision met her dazzled view!
And as the form celestial nearer drew,
The olive-branch, conspicuous wav'd on high,
Proclaim'd the Goddess Peace herself indeed was nigh.

The cornu copia, fill'd with golden grain,
Shew'd welcome PLENTY foremost in her train;
The fair associates, with auspicious smile,
Embrac'd the favour'd guardians of our isle,
With emblematic wreaths her temples crown'd,
And she their animating influence all around.
For now, to hail the long-expected pair,
A grateful nation's heart-felt raptures rise
In joyful acclamations thro' the air,
And Albion's rocks re-echo to the skies!
Whilst thus BRITANNIA, low, on bended knee,
Pours forth maternal transports for the blest decree.

"Welcome!  thrice welcome to my sea-girt shore,
Celestial visitant, whose healing hand
The faded form of Freedom shall restore,
And sooth the sorrows of my bleeding land.
See Discord frighted flies, and in her train
Fell famine, and pale poverty, that share her reign.
No more the drum's discordant warlike sound,
Enlisted warriors shall assemble round;
No more the trumpet's clangor call to arms,
And fill the female bosom with alarms;
Nor from his friends the gallant Tar be torn,
A loss, even victory may bid them deeply mourn.

"Extortion, with relentless iron hand,
No more shall crush the peasant in his shed,
Monopolize the produce of the land,
And wrest from industry her daily bread;
But labour, whilst he cultivates the soil,
Anticipate the rich reward of all his toil.
Again shall Commerce spread her swelling sails,
And wafted o'er the deep by fav'ring gales,
Import her various inexhausted stores,
From Greenland's ice, and India's sultry shores,
And whilst she thus promotes the mutual gain,
Unite the nations in a golden, social chain.

"Yes, PEACE &mdash; the pleasing, glorious task is thine,
Diffusing round philanthropy divine,
The sacred force of friendship to impart
From pole to pole, thro' ev'ry human heart,
Till narrow-minded prejudice retire,
And universal love each glowing breast inspire!
Then shall the Muses bless our happy isle,
And freely pour their captivating strain;
On ev'ry useful art success shall smile,
And heav'n-born Science wide extend her reign;
Whilst loyalty supports our Monarch's throne,
And equal laws confirm these blessings all our own.

"But yet, my sons, whilst thus the general joy
In peals of exultation echoes round,
Let soft Humanity her power employ,
With lenient hand to close Affliction's wound;
The widow's and the orphan's woes to heal,
Who long the dire effects of martial strife must feel.
For ah!  how many bear a lasting fear,
Inflicted by the ruthless rage of war;
And many a hero, still his country's pride,
For us, who bravely fought and nobly dy'd,
Demands the tribute of a generous tear,
Whilst Fame with trophies decks his consecrated bier."

"And thou, O Peace!  thy influence benign
To private strife and mental woe extend;
Let friends united own thy power divine,
And to the wretched be a gen'ral friend.
Thou only canst a cordial balm impart
To heal the bleeding breast, and cheer the hopeless heart.
And as the dawn of this propitious morn
Has blest the ship-wreck'd mariner forlorn,
Who struggled thro' the dark nocturnal hour,
Beneath the vengeful tempest's boist'rous pow'r,
So may thy genial, all-enlivening ray,
Beam on the harrass'd woe-worn soul internal day.

"But chief to HIM who rules the earth and skies
Let fervent hymns of grateful incense rise!
For HE, the cause and source of every good,
Has check'd the savage waste of human blood;
Commanded animosity to cease,
And blest his people with the radiant smile of Peace.
And as his mercy sheath'd the murd'rous sword,
And shower'd abundance on our drooping land,
O!  may the laws of his eternal word
Decree these blessing permanent shall stand,
And on thy basis, Virtue, fix'd secure,
Still unimpair'd remain till time shall be no more."
