Happy the youth, who, doom'd the laws to scan,
On third or second floor, sublimely pores
O'er pages pregnant with the mystic lore
Of law-inditing sage; or whom his fate
Auspicious tempts to climb the fearful height
Of statutes undigested, &mdash; venturous task,&mdash;
Yet glorious too!  Thus erst (as poets chaunt)
Huge mountains rose, by sons of earth upheav'd,
O'ertopping mountains to the wond'ring skies,
Fabric stupendous!  dreadful e'en to Jove.
Whilst, happy thus employed, the student kills
The toilsome hour, no agitating cares
His life perplex; but, steep'd in thought, he sinks,
Or roams in mazy labyrinths of law,
Or sagely ponders o'er the well profound,
Where lie, deep hidden from unhallow'd ken
And vulgar search, embucketed below,
Quibbles and quirks, and all the secret springs
Of bliss litigious.  Fondly here his eyes
Feast covetous; nor quits he yet the sight,
So charm'd he seems, till halcyon slumbers roll
His ravish'd brain athwart, leading along
A honied train of ecstacies divine
And joys ineffable.  The mistress, too,
Of legal science, fair Confusion, comes,
Washing with floods of Lethe from the soil
Present and past, and with bewild'ring shades
Of dark conjecture clouding scenes to come.

These the delights that wait in certain round
The student's envied life.  How vain are those
The poet idly boasts, with these compar'd!
What sounds melodious of his lyre belov'd
Can so entrance or chain the raptured sense,
As the soul-moving mysteries of Law?

Such transports fill the meditative hours
Of Templar, (as in citadel aloft
He muses solitary,) luring sleep
And sweetest dreams, with learned reveries
Unnumber'd.  But more happy far the youth,
Far happier he, whose weighty purse contains
The golden spell!  He wants no means to know
The arts mysterious of that sapient tribe,
Draftsmen, to wit, or special pleaders, hight
By mortal men, &mdash; but on Olympus known
As guardian wights and oracles of law.
To these the favour'd youth, by Plutus arm'd
As once, (so bards have sung,) in days of yore,
All-tuneful Orpheus, with his numbers, bought
Admission unmolested to the realms
Of Stygian night.  For glittering gold, we know,
Hath charms, not less than music, to relax
Breasts hard as adamant.  But who shall sing
His secret bliss, who, through the silent haunts
Of Elm or Fig-Tree Court, thrice-hallow'd shades!
His solemn pace extends, musing along
On some yet embryo-pleading, soon, perchance,
In chambers of some special sage to shine
In form mature, emerging from the womb
Of murky fiction:  as the noonday sun,
Through clouds o'ershadowing and through vapours dense,
Darts his full beam, enlight'ning all around!&mdash;
As thus the sun, so bursts to light the plea.
