BOOK I.
Come, blest companion of my happiest hours!
Divine directress of my infant pow'rs!
Whose presence charm'd me in the woodland shade,
When autumn's shivering leaf began to fade;
Or Spring, profusely, from her roseate horn,
Dispens'd the flow'rs that scent the humid morn;
MUSE of my native valley!  haste along;...
Awake Remembrance, and inspire the song!
Let fond attachment dwell on pleasures past,
By absence weaken'd, nor by time effac'd:
But, while I mark the changes that appear
In country manners, O, forgive the tear!

Where yonder thymy down expanded lies,
And spreads its purple bosom to the skies,
There many a shepherd-boy was wont to keep
His father's scanty flock of scatter'd sheep:
I've seen them oft their narrow track pursue,
And wind adown those knolls to pastures new,...
Or, group'd beneath the solitary thorn,
That lends new fragrance to the breath of morn,
Lie panting, &mdash; shelter'd from the pest'ring fly,
The smoth'ring dust, and Day's refulgent eye....
Young Ralph's domain to yonder maple hedge
Extended ... Edmund's, to the common's edge....
The common, clad with vegetative gold,
Whose well-dried stores allay the wintry cold;
Whence ev'ry family its portion claims,
To fence the hovel, or recruit the flames....
From path to path, that winds along the plain,
The cheerful Stephen held his rustic reign;
While, still observant of his due commands,
In act to start, the faithful Keeper stands.
Numbers, beside, there led their bleating charge,
Enjoy'd their pastimes gay, and rov'd at large;
But now no more those rural scenes invite,
Far diff'rent objects meet the aching sight;
In all the pomp of sanguinary war,
I see the military bands, afar,
Extend their glitt'ring lines, or, wheeling wide,
In parallel divide and sub-divide,
While, thro' the op'ning ranks, loud martial strains
Progressive, roll along the dusty plains,
Which yield no pasture to the fleecy kind,
That distant range, their juicy meal to find.
Scar'd from her haunts, the twitt'ring linnet flies,
The quiv'ring lark ascends the smould'ring skies,
And finches, that on downy thistles feed,
Spread their gilt wings, and seek the silent mead.

Hence, let me turn, and down the well-known vale
Direct my steps, and all my soul regale!
'Twas here I first beheld th' etherial ray,
And, sorrowing, enter'd Life's precarious way,
Unconscious, o'er a Father's timeless bier,
In childhood doom'd to shed the ready tear,
Nor long a Mother's arms, ... so Heav'n ordain'd,...
The orphan mourner piously sustain'd;
But HE, whose mercy over all presides,
Provided early friends, and faithful guides,
For whom, till life's warm tide forgets to flow,
This beating breast with gratitude shall glow.
Ye dreams of youthful Fancy, ever dear!
Sources of many a rapture-giving tear!
How have ye conjur'd up your fairy train,
And mov'd my fondly-swelling heart in vain?
"Here," have I said, ... for still I lov'd the shade
Of country life, and shunn'd the world's parade;...
Here, would indulgent Heav'n my wish befriend,
Th' allotted portion of my days I'd spend;
The ash, the elm, beneath whose infant boughs.
The school-boy oft the vig'rous sports would rouse,
With him grown old, its sturdy limbs should spread,
Umbrageous, bending o'er his hoary head;
The gay coevals of his ruddy prime
Should lead him down the devious dale of time;
And the same yews that o'er his parents wave,
Should drop their dews upon his peaceful grave."
Here could Imagination ever dwell,
And tune to rural themes the vocal-shell;
Themes ever dear!  congenial to the heart,
Wild as her numbers, lovely as her art!
But fate forbids ... yet let not pride disdain
The village poet, or his pensive strain.
Lo!  where yon blooming orchards amply spread,
My native cottage shows its thatch-crown'd head
Along the plaister'd wall the woodbine blows,
And its rich foliage round the casement throws;
In which, at early peep of blue-ey'd day,
With crest elate, the Robin trills his lay.
While, (so tradition says,) a curse shall fall
On him who dares the minstrel sweet enthral!
Behind, the thorn-fenc'd garden spreads its store,
The rill, for ever gurgling, flows before.
Delightful spot!  where my forefathers spent
Their honest days in labour and content:
Health strung their nerves, and exercise conspir'd
To give those pleasures which their hearts desir'd.
That fav'rite garden was their early pride,...
Their cloves, their pinks, all others far outvied,...
Ambitious they, the choicest flow'rs to rear,
That form a Sunday nosegay for the fair;
For they could bid their gay creation rise,
And dip their fringy bells in Iris' dyes,
Tho' strangers to the scientific rules
Of tutor'd florists, or of pedant schools.
Hence too, they drew their vegetable cheer,
Thro' all the changes of the circling year;
When Ceres deck'd her brows with corn-flow'rs wild,
And ripening harvests round the country smil'd,
They snatch'd the sickle, foremost of the swains,
Outvied their peers, and stripp'd the loaded plains:
When tawny Autumn shook the orchard round,
And foaming vats with British nectar crown'd,
They cull'd the choicest fruits for winter's store,
And jocund home the groaning baskets bore;
Nor envied they the wealth that greatness owns,
Nor cumbrous pomp that waits on grandeur's sons;
Parties and politics, that fire the breast
Of modern meddlers, ne'er disturb'd their rest:
No vain anticipating pang they knew,
Nor bade, with pain, departing joys adieu!
The present bliss each far-fetch'd care defied,
And Nature's simplest gifts their wants supplied.

I well remember, from my earliest day,
The pleasing scenes where childhood lov'd to stray;
And how maturer youth, with fancy wild,
The light-wing'd hours of innocence beguil'd,
When all was novelty, and o'er the mind
The transient trouble left no trace behind.
Where humming bees their pleasing murmurs keep,
Where glitt'ring streamlets trickle down the steep,
Where rocks, projecting o'er the dark-green main,
Present a bound to Neptune's watery reign,
Th' inspiring song of melancholy Gray,
Or rural Thomson's soul-dissolving lay;
Or, higher still, great Milton's hallow'd strain,
Or Shakespear's wild-notes would my mind detain.

Up the long lawn, the narrow path I trace,
To where the sloping hill the tall woods grace,
Beneath whose shade the rustic stile I see,
O'er which I clamber'd, when from school set free,
With many a gay companion in my train,
To pluck wild strawberries thro' the sylvan reign,
Returning late, an ever-welcome guest,
To fill the milk-bowl with a fragrant feast,
Tho' often warn'd to shun the loit'rer's crime,
Who, heedless of the stealing step of Time,
Marks not the sun the western skies forsake,
Till gath'ring darkness bids his bosom quake;
For, where that stunted elm erects its head,
A poor unhappy villager, 'tis said,
With moody madness, louring on his brows,
Himself suspended to its barren boughs;
And there, at midnight hour, when howls the storm,
Leans o'er the creaking gate, the ghostly form,
With saucer eyes, and clotted hair uprear'd,
Around whose neck the strangling cord appear'd:
Nor whip, nor spur, can urge the traveller's horse
To face the spectre, or pursue his course;
Restive, he rears, impatient of the rein,
And snorts, and wheels, and flings, and rear again;
But if, if, afar, some cock's shrill voice should rise,
In sulph'rous flames th' accursed spirit flies!

Oft has my Grandam begg'd me to refrain
From boyish pranks, which give another pain;
For still her heart, to sympathy inclin'd,
Benevolently felt for all mankind;
And oft, affectingly, would she recite
The tale of SIMON and the Fiery Sprite!

'Twas in her prime, when simpler manners reign'd,
And at their board plain farmers entertain'd
The village taylor, oft, whose stated care,
The rustic wardrobe kept in due repair.
The dext'rous SIMON, late one Christmas eve,
Receiv'd his groat, and took respectful leave,
With ale replenish'd, and with bosom warm,
The ploughman's lantern dangling on his arm:
Tho' moon nor stars dispens'd one cheering ray,
He, whistling homeward, urg'd his ready way.
The barn, the cow-house, and the bridge he past,
And reach'd the solitary lane at last,
Beneath whose mould'ring banks, at even-tide,
'Tis said, a restless ghost was wont to glide:
Where oaks, o'er-arching, form a deeper shade,
And rising breezes rustle thro' the glade;
'Midst the quick hedge a ghastly form he spies,
With bald, transparent head, and hollow eyes,
The mouth, from ear to ear, extended wide,
With long, black teeth abundantly supplied.
A rushing horror curdled all his blood
Fast beat his heart, his hair erected stood;
His knees, that now together 'gan to smite,
Could scarce assist him in his backward flight;
His lantern meets an interposing post,...
In stench and smoke the welcome light is lost;
While clanking chains, to aggravate his fears,
Pour their dread discord on his startled ears!
His implements of trade, where'er he trod,...
Goose, shears, and bodkin, strew'd the darksome road:
One short ejaculation 'scap'd his tongue,
And prone on earth he stretch'd his length along!

The wags, alarm'd, burst from their sly retreat,
And rais'd their trembling victim on his feet;
To calm his fears, the hollow turnip bore;
And show'd the chains, that on their arms they wore,
In vain! ... At home arriv'd, he sought his bed,
Where many a painful, feverish month he led,
And still, whene'er this fatal day return'd,
The same sensations in his bosom burn'd!

Few years are past, since, on the paddock green,
Beneath the hill, that old farm-house was seen,
Round which the barley-mows and wheat-ricks rose,
And cattle sought refreshment and repose.
The cock, proud marching with his cackling train,
Sought the barn-door, to pick the scatter'd grain;
The trotting sow her spotted offspring led,
And gobbling turkeys rear'd the crimson head.
The mistress there, and blooming daughters, drest
In russet stuffs, their new-made cheeses prest,
Summon'd the swine the full repast to share,
And rais'd their poultry with assiduous care,...
From whose increase their private fortune grew,...
Their ancient right, and still acknowledg'd due;...
While in the fields young Master held the plough;
Form'd the square load, or trod the fragrant mow:
Familiar still, he crack'd the ready joke,
And sure applause attended all he spoke.
For change, sometimes, with unremitting care,
He led his healthful flock to pastures fair,
Along the green-wood's verge would guard the fold
From crafty foxes and marauders bold;
The helpless lambs, with tender toil, would guide
To shelt'ring bush, or hay-stack's sunny side:
In herbs and simples he was skill'd full well,
He taught their virtues crude disease to quell;
And, on the festive eve of shearing, heard
His praise proclaim'd, his noblest, best reward!
By rains confin'd, the sounding flail he plied,
Nor scorn'd the meanest lab'rer by his side.
All day the rustic clamour fill'd the air,
And Health, Content, and Cheerfulness, were there.

Ye, who have seen your country's better days,
When many an envying nation spoke her praise,...
Think ye her sons were then more brave, more wise,
More firmly bound by patriotic ties?...
Or is it our refinement to maintain,
That now the rich oppress, ... the poor complain?...
If so, ... O, perish the detested cause!...
Bend only we to GOD, and Nature's laws!

Four miles from hence, across an odorous down,
Snug in the valley, lies the market-town,
From whence the humble hamlets, far and nigh,
Once in the week, their casual wants supply.
Thither our Farmer oft dispatch'd his team,
Ere the red east shot forth its golden gleam,
To bear his groaning gran'ry's choicest store,...
Its price adapted for the neighb'ring poor,
Whom, in all dealings, he remember'd still,
Nor deign'd, by sordid arts, his purse to fill ....
O, fair example!  now no longer known,
Since grasping Av'rice serves herself alone!
The distant music of the waggon bells
Resounds in mellow echoes down the dells,
The hoarse horn warning, from th' approaching wain,
To shun th' encounter in the narrow lane.
And, lo!  the dairy mare is taught to wait,
With docile patience, at the barton gate,
Where she receives, in creaking panniers stow'd,
Eggs, poultry, butter, cream, ... a precious load!...
And, mounting from an elm's fall'n trunk, the dame
Takes her proud seat, nor sighs for loftier fame.
One fav'rite ploughboy trudges by her side,
With wicker-basket, plenteously supplied;
His songs, his tales, excite the mistress' smiles,
And, o'er the dusty road, the hour beguiles.

But, O, what rapture in each bosom wrought,
Whene'er the due-revolving seasons brought
The morn of wake, or fair!  From sleepless night
They rose, impatient, ere the grey morn's light,
Collecting all the pleasure-loving train,
To share the joys and pastimes of the plain.
In milk-white frock, and buckskin breeches, clean,
The lusty ploughman rous'd his bosom's queen:
Wak'd from sweet dreams, she hears the rattling glass,
And at her lattice peeps, ... a bonny lass!
The wakeful dairy-maid, on anxious watch,
Starts, as her shepherd lifts the clattering latch;
And, while in his her trembling hand is prest,
The half-form'd passion heaves her lab'ring breast.
Their's the pure bliss the virtuous only prove,
Unfelt, untasted by licentious love,
Which, like the baleful ivy, 'midst its joys,
Its object clasps, and while it clasps, destroys.

From ev'ry village, trooping damsels come,
In native charms, and blushing beauty's bloom,
Unknown to gossip Fame, or seldom seen
Beyond the precincts of the cottage green.
So, in the mossy dell, coy violets rise,
Beneath the influence soft of April skies,
Sweet breathing only for the pensive swains,
Who trace, at early dawn, the lonely plains;
While foxgloves tall ascend, in atoned pride,
And flaunt, unheeded, by the pathway side.

From cold restraint and ceremony free,
The dame, the master, shine with equal glee,
When first the scene of rustic joy appears,
Where youth forgets its toil, and age its cares,
And, while they see their poor dependants blest,
A more exalted pleasure thrills the breast.

High on the hill, whose ever-verdant brow
O'erlooks the flood, the heath, the woods, below,
Up whose steep side, in Sunday robes array'd,
The happy peasant leads his happier maid,
Behold the booths arise, in comely rows,
And barb'rous paintings mark the place of shows,
Where growls the bear, and where the lion's roar,
With sudden panic, strikes the gaping boor;
Or all the puppet prodigies advance,
With Punch to combat, or with Joan to dance;
While the craz'd organ's ever-drawling strain,
In magic shackles, binds th' admiring train!

But, O, for those, whom cruel Fate denies
To share the bliss this mirthful morn supplies!...
The pouting younkers, doom'd at home to stay,
Promis'd to take their turn another day,
Impatient, till the evening glooms prevail,
Watch at the wicket, down the dark'ning dale,
Anxious th' expected fairing to behold,...
Knife, book, or toy, bedropp'd with glitt'ring gold;
Or ribbon, particolour'd, pink or blue,...
Distinctive tribute, ... long to merit due;
For pride in every little bosom reigns,
But their's the pride that modesty restrains:
Unlike the modern Farmer's daughters they,...
For whom the alter'd mansion rises gay,
Divested of the rustic scenery round,
While shrubs exotic form the verdant bound,
Or Chinese rails, at modish distance keep
The lowing heifer and the nibbling sheep:
These, who purloin their brightest charms from art,
And scorn what Nature's simple rules impart,
Who shine at essenc'd ball, or crowded play,
But faint at fragrance of the clover hay;
Torture French idioms, or, perforce, aspire,
With well-curv'd hand, to strike the sounding wire;...
Hear with disgust the skylark's trembling throat,
Or darkling nightingale's melodious note;
Taught to despise the humble household trade,
For daubing landscapes, or the fond parade
Of spinning senseless sonnets to the Nine,...
A task more vain, more profitless than mine!

Once more I turn, the worthy group to view,
In duty's path; ... for still they dar'd pursue
That narrow track, with Conscience for their guide;
Fashion nor Folly drew their steps aside:...
E'en lisping babes, amid the daily care,
Were taught to lift their little hands in prayer:...
To HIM, from whom the stream of mercy flows,
Each morn, each eve, their grateful hymns arose.
For others' woes the warmest tear they shed,
And, cheerful, dealt to beggar'd Want their bread;
Still taught to know, that yet the hour might come,
When they should need a parent, friend, or home
And when the day, to pure devotion due,
Return'd, ... to that accustom'd period true,...
Methinks I see them, in their best array,
Forth issuing, down the lawn, pursue their way.
Young Beauty smiles on ev'ry female cheek,...
A simple ribbon binds their tresses sleek,
While not a wish their tranquil bosoms bear,
To deck, with Asia's radiant gems, their hair;
Or, imitative of the courtly rage,
Disguise its honours with the frost of age.
One bears the hallow'd book, in which appear
Names, births, and deaths, in character most clear,
With pious hand, from sire to son transferr'd,
And kept from injuries with a choice regard.
Thro' their own corn-field brown they wind along,
With frequent greetings from the passing throng,
Till rising, rude, beside the deep-worn way,...
Where lounging youths and village damsels stray,
Where shepherds meet, from weekly toil repriev'd,
And sun-burnt cowboys, for the hour reliev'd,
While mellow bells, with oft-revolving chime,
Proclaim the near approach of service time,...
Lash'd by the wintry storms of countless years,
The moss-grown tower, in lonely site, appears.

The rev'rend Pastor, now advancing slow,
Notes with respect each salutation low:
Tho' pure his doctrines, with instruction fraught,
"His life adorn'd the doctrines which he taught."
Far from his flock, he idled not his days,
Like modern teachers, lost in pleasure's ways,...
Triflers!  regardless of their sacred charge,
Who leave it to the enemy at large!
Good will and charity for all he bore,
And sigh'd sincerely, when he could no more.
But whence this change?  The path with grass o'ergrown,
The mould'ring tombs, the fences broken down,
While delving hogs, and toil-worn horses tread
The regions of the undistinguish'd dead,...
The vicarage wails with streaks of green defil'd,
The windows hid with weeds and nettles wild?
The ample garden, long in deep decay,
Exhibits now no more its sun-flowers gay;
Tulips nor hollyhocks flaunt in summer pride,
Nor raspberry thickets grace its southern side.

A richer cure the wealthy Rector shares,
And to an ill-paid stranger leaves his cares;
While to the distant watering-place he hies,
Or dissipations of the city tries:
Once in the year the needful visit pays,
And thro' some long-forgotten sermon strays;
While, round the yawning congregation, fly
Somnific spells, and light on ev'ry eye!

How shall the Muse her indignation spare,
When Pride and Av'rice Merit's honours wear?
Fain would she plead the worthy Curate's cause,
To scanty income bound by narrow laws,
Who, while he deals th' eternal bread of life,
Hears clamorous infants and a virtuous wife
Demand, in vain, their perishable food,
And claim the bounty of the kind and good:
Think what the mind intelligent most feel!
How deep the wound, ... how difficult to heal!

O ye!  who love religion's hallow'd name,
Awake in kindred breasts a generous shame;
Nor longer let a blushing land forbear,
To soothe the suff'rings of those sons of Care!

Beneath yon elders, furr'd with black'ning smoke
The sinewy Smith, with many a labour'd stroke,
His clinking anvil plied, in shed obscure,
And truant schoolboys loiter'd round the door.
There would the swains, on wintry eve, retire,
To warm their limbs, and blow the rumbling fire;
While various tales their proffer'd toil repaid,
And vast improvement to the mind convey'd;
For much of life th' experienced sage had seen,
In peace and war, since royal Anne was queen;
And much, of fights and shipwrecks sad, he told,...
Of burning mountains and of Scythian cold,...
Of spectre forms, that haunt the convent's gloom,
Or fiends that glare around the murderer's tomb!
But now the sledge, the file, no more resounds;
No more the ploughboy, from the neighb'ring grounds,
At evening, trudges with the blunted share,
Or broken traces, to receive repair.
Poor, stumbling Ball no more shall thither plod,
And dozing wait, in patience, to be shod.
The fertile lawn, of idly-pamper'd steeds,
A useless race, for false ambition, breeds.
The fallow lands, where cheerful peasants earn'd
Their weekly bread, to proud plantations turn'd,
Forget to yield their auburn crops of grain,
That fill'd the petty farmer's early wain,
When, on his ambling nag, he took his round,
With flaggon to the tatter'd saddle bound,
Replenish'd well with hearty home-brew'd ale,
The toil-contending reapers to regale.
Now into one a hundred fields are thrown,
Their tenants banish'd, and their pleasures flown!
To crowded towns, the poor mechanic strays,
To spend the sickly evening of his days;
Or hostile fields, or boist'rous seas, he proves,...
A hapless exile from the scenes he loves;
While Recollection ever to his mind
Presents those comforts he has left behind!

True, an unhappy remnant still remains,
Which grudging Pride with scanty dole sustains,...
A hopeless race, that own yon bleak abode,
Of Grief and care, beside the public road,
Propp'd are whose leaning walls, whose hanging door
Drags heavy, jarring on the earthen floor;
Keen thro' the shatter'd casements cold winds blow,
The half-stripp'd roof admits the whirling snow;
Scarce, on the gloomy hearth, one lingering spark
The cricket cheers, or gilds his cavern dark;
While, shivering round, the wretched inmates stand,...
A ragged, meagre, pale, dejected band!
Here is the man who wealthy days has seen;
Here is the widow, ... once the village queen;...
Here too, the damsel, who, in guardless hour,
Fell a sad victim to Seduction's pow'r!...
Curst be the villain, whose insidious art
Tainted her virgin purity of heart,
Then left her, thus, to shame, reproach, and grief,
Sure only in the grave to find relief:
Here orphans bend to Poverty's hard laws,
Whose fathers perish'd in their Country's cause!
Wives, ... anxious wives!  for distant husbands mourn,
In vain anticipating their return!
Mothers, of their last duteous sons bereft,
Without one hope, or consolation left;
With numbers more, whose tale but to disclose,
Would swell "the catalogue of human woes."

In genial climes, where softer seasons reign,
Amid the bosom of the placid main,
Where never Commerce nor the Arts deign'd smile
On the rude natives of some lonely isle,
Well might the wood, the cave, or clift afford
Sufficient shelter to the wand'ring hoard;
But in this land of elegance and ease,
Where all that sweetens life conspires to please,
Can polish'd man, behold his fellows pine,
In scenes like these, ... and every joy resign?...
Beneath the torturing passions' cruel strife,
To languish out the poor remains of life?

Oh, happy land!  ere Luxury learnt to roam,
In quest of pleasures, better sought at home,
Where Heav'n, impartial, spreads her blessings wide,
Nor, captious, sets her meanest sons aside;
Say, ... do the purple borders of the Rhine,
Or Arno's sides with brighter fruitage shine,
Than thine own vales? ... Hesperian vineyards fair
Boast fresher streams, or breathe a purer air?
What, tho' the Ganges' hallow'd tide be roll'd
O'er rocks of diamond, and o'er sands of gold,...
Tho' ancient Nile, with fructifying waves,
An earthly paradise unfailing laves;
Behold our fields, with glorious harvests crown'd;
Voluptuous meads, where fat'ning herds abound;
Those plains, where Pan his fleecy charge attends,
The countless stores that rich Pomona sends:
Then say, ... shall ALBION envy other climes,
Or mourn, inglorious, her degenerate times?
Yes, ... mourn she must!  For, lo!  a venal band
On Nature's bounty lay the griping hand,
Wrest from the poor the patrimonial cot,
His paddock add to their superfluous lot,
Meanly dependent, bid him seek his bread,
While, Timur-like, their vassal down they tread,
Frustrate the scheme wise Providence has plann'd,
And half depopulate their native land!

Have you no bowels, ... you, who claim the name
Of Man?  Or different is your mental frame,
Whose ears, unmov'd, can hear the voice of woe,
Whose eyes behold the streams of sorrow flow?
How shall you lift those hands to MERCY'S throne,
Which ne'er to deal her liberal gifts were known?

Vice and Corruption, bane of ev'ry state,
Attend the will, and hurl the bolts of Fate;
Yet, tho' thick clouds involve her laurell'd head,
And tenfold darkness round her throne is spread,
Tho' wars and tumults menace as they roll,
Shake the deep centre, and convulse the pole,
Say, ... will the GOD of AGES, who so long
Has propp'd her state, and bade her tow'r be strong,
Let BRITAIN sink, to swift destruction hurl'd,
Example awful to a wond'ring world?...
ALMIGHTY POW'R!  by whose eternal hand
Kingdoms, or states, or empires, fall or stand;
O, spare my country!  Fix her hopes on THEE,
And let her still be glorious, great, and free!


BOOK II.
Still to my heart recurs that joyous time,
When all the gay companions of my prime
Pursued their pastimes, innocent and wild,
Devoid of care, ... beguiling and beguil'd,
Blythe as the morn, when first she rose to view,
And from her pinions shook ambrosial dew,
Oft, skipping down their native vale, they stray'd,
And midst the long, rank grass, insidious laid,
Watch'd the coy finch and speckled woodlark play
Beside the brook, where tangling lime-twigs lay.
High beat each heart, when on the potent spell
They hop, incautious, and reluctant dwell,
While their gay wings, in slimy fetters bound,
The little fluttering fugitives surround!

So dark Arachne, o'er the rafter'd shed,
From pois'nous bowels, draws the treach'rous thread,
On which the vagrant insect heedless flies,
And rolls her in inextricable ties.

Frequent along the margin of the stream,
Where the tall rush repell'd the noon-tide beam,
Swelt'ring, they rov'd, and threw the slender line,
Where spangled trouts thro' liquid amber shine,
Or the sly jack, in death-like stillness lies,
Where the dark bank and whispering willows rise.

Nor fear'd the youths the lonely pool to brave,
Where one rude plank, across the deep, dull wave,
Presents a dang'rous pass, o'er which the maid,
With timid step, requires her lover's aid,
Returning late from fields of tedded hay,
Or the long labours of th' autumnal day;
What time, with rustic melody, the gale,
Surcharg'd, comes floating down the dewy dale;
But now, even here, as Fancy loves to range,
With melting eyes, she marks each fatal change.

See that lone hut, amid the plashy meads,
Half hid in osiers and rank shooting reeds;...
Bare are the rafters, door and windows gone,
And there the otter holds his seat alone;
Beneath that roof erst dwelt an ancient dame,...
Her only son, who bore the father's name,
Was of her widow'd age the hope and stay,
While Resignation roll'd her hours away.
For them the rivers gave their finny store,
The field its gleanings, ... little crav'd they more;...
White willow baskets skilfully they fram'd,
For market traffic, thro' the village fam'd,
And, in the bosom of sweet solitude,
Shar'd the calm joys that charm the wise and good.
Now bend your view to where, with rumbling sound,
The gloomy mill-wheel turns reluctant round,
Dashing, with feathery spray, the stream it laves,
And stirring tempests in the troubled waves;
Near there it was, returning from the fair,
At which he annually produc'd his ware,
Poor ROGER, on a dark and starless night,
Mistook his way, and rov'd in hopeless plight:
The miller and his mill, in peace repos'd,
And not a cot one twinkling ray disclos'd;
The banks were slipp'ry and the wear was full;
Still was the stream, and deep the sluggish pool!
His mother watch'd, till daybreak, all alone,
Lamenting dolefully her absent son,
And he return'd not! ... But when morning rose,
To fill the measure of her mighty woes,
She learnt, ... the Gamekeeper, who that way pass'd,
Some footsteps to the river's brink had trac'd,
And sounding, with his fording-pole, around,
At the mill-head the bloated body found!
Alas!  poor SUSAN! ... Farewell, peace and joy!
Ten tedious years she mourn'd her duteous boy,
Oppress'd by poverty and pinching care,...
For times grew hard, ... too hard indeed to bear!
And half depopulated was the vale,...
With scarce one neighbour to attend her tale,
To smooth her sad, sick bed, or with her pray,
While life's last hour was wearing fast away.
But FAITH and HOPE ... a radiant pair! ... stood by,
To waft her spirit to their native sky.
Long her misfortunes claim'd the ready tear,
And still the country holds her memory dear.

The worthy Squire will be remember'd long,
The theme and pride of every cottage song;
His Lady too, ... the patroness and friend
Of all whom merit, worth, or want commend;
Whose heart benevolent, and lib'ral mind,
Nor prejudice nor narrow views confin'd.
With grateful joy the widow heard her voice,
Which bade e'en pale Infirmity rejoice,
While virtuous orphans, objects of her-care,
Translated to her household, flourish'd fair.

Their well-known mansion, on the green hill's side,
O'erlook'd the village with a decent pride;
But not with pompous arrogance deterr'd
The meanest wretch, that there his suit preferr'd.
Its windows catch the morning's orient glow,
And flash the colours of the varying bow;
Lilacs and jess'mines form a shrubb'ry round,
And showers of rose-leaves decorate the ground,
Shook from their stems, projecting from the bush,
By gold-bill'd blackbirds and the mottled thrush.

The cultur'd garden opposite is seen,
With sheltering walls, and walks for ever green;
Blossoms, or fruits, on every branch abound,
And gentlest breezes waft their fragrance round;
Where half the village shar'd in grateful toils,
And youth and age partook th' autumnal spoils;
There too, the bard has rov'd, a favour'd guest,
While youthful transports warm'd his ardent breast.

At the last bell, that tinkled from the hall,
The hospitable board was spread for all
Whom business brought, or ancient friendship led,
Secure of ungrudg'd cheer and needful bed;
Round went the mantling horn, the butler's boast!
Nor one refus'd to pledge th' accustom'd toast,
Till each warm heart with thankfulness o'erflows,
And gives the tongue each secret that it knows.

Where now the park extends, and useless deer
Along the solitary glades appear,
Rich corn-flelds wav'd, in spacious prospect spread.
Nor felt one villager the want of bread.

Nor then the copse its store of game denied,
Withheld by Av'rice or engross'd by Pride:...
Where the keen bill had clear'd the brushwood scene
Of sprouting hazle, broom, and alder green.
When, thro' the bed of snow, the rude stumps shoot,
The peasant trac'd the limping leveret's foot,
Or drew his net across the pathway deep,
While boys and dogs perpetual clamour keep,
And rabbits, bolting from the thickest shade,
Caught in the toils, are struggling captives made.
In that dark season, when around the skies,
In dragon-forms, the clust'ring clouds arise;
While roaring storms in drenching floods descend,
And black-brow'd forests to their fury bend;
When scarce the crow maintains his airy seat,
Tost on the bough, where mingling tempests beat,
The Woodman, hid in some deep-shelter'd spot,
Pursues his toil beneath his wattled cot,...
There forms the faggot, or the hurdle wreaths,
Alternate on his cold-nipp'd fingers breathes,
And claps his hands, till tingling warmth inspires
His glowing veins, and wakes their dormant fires.
Secure, he hears the slanting hail rebound
From the thatch'd roof, and rattle to the ground.
In vain the vengeful North unpitying raves,
His mustering wrath the thicket steep outbraves,
And, like the billows of the rolling main,
Yields to the blast, and sinks, and swells again.

Nor you, ... who, mid the dissipated round
Of college lore, have trodden classic ground,
Pursued by pedant scourge thro' Lily's rules,
And all the thorny lab'rinths of the schools,...
Despise the truths the Muse delights to tell,...
How in those woods the Sciences would dwell,
On Nature's bosom nurs'd, by Genius taught,
By Perseverance to perfection brought!
In shades obscure, where ne'er the voice of Fame
Blandish'd the peasant's unsuspected name,
The sire with joy his hopeful boys beheld,
In many an art beyond their fellows skill'd:
No idle intervals of time they knew,
Nor unimprov'd one heedless moment flew,
In simple psalmody they own'd no peer,
And oft would chaunt, with voices strong and clear,
The loftier anthem, thro' the toilsome day,
With variation sweet, ... a heav'nly lay!...
Constant at church, they led the village quire,
Where sacred music set the soul on fire;
And well they knew to touch the breathing reed
To gayer notes, which sprightly dances lead,
Beneath the sycamore's soft, rustling shade,
When first the moon lights up the length'ning glade,
Shows meads, and streams, in mildest beauties dress'd,
And the young heart leaps lightly in the breast.
In darksome nights, when all the vales were still,
Their flute was heard, along the neighb'ring hill,
In concert with the attic minstrel's strain,
Expressive of her gentle bosom's pain.
E'en from the hour, that gives their frugal meal,
Some little portion, sedulous, they steal,
When Cocker's rules their studious minds engage,
Rude chalk their pencil, the broad bill their page,
With various, hasty statements, scribbled o'er,
Till the bright surface would contain no more:
The ignorant heard, with wonderment profound,
How many grains would girt the globe around;
How many hours in one long age appear,
How many minutes constitute the year.
Oft, sketch'd in outline, rustic landscapes rose,
And hills and vales their various views disclose;
Scenes rudely wild, of composition new,
Devoid of art, and still to nature true.

Thus past the day; and when the ev'ning gale
Dispers'd the black clouds, sailing down the dale,
And, from the bright'ning west, a yellow ray
Struck, lightly twinkling, on the dripping spray,
They left their shed, and, on the homeward road,
Pursued their course, beneath the rustling load
Of wither'd branches, doom'd to reinspire
Their shiv'ring limbs, and heap the crackling fire.
Impatient, peeping from the restless door,
The waiting infants ev'ry name implore;
The first sight caught, they run, they leap, they fly!
Awaken'd raptures dance in every eye,
Contentious noise and tumult fill the place,
To snatch the hand, or share the first embrace;
And round the hearth, from cares and anguish free,
Each claims a right to climb the envied knee.
O state of transport!  honest and sincere,
Unmix'd with pangs that prouder bosoms bear,
By frigid forms of etiquette uncheck'd,
Undamp'd by fortune, or the world's neglect!
Warm, thro' each bosom, flows the genial tide,
By Gratitude's unfailing fount supplied.
To HIM, ... the author of consummate good,
For needful raiment, and for daily food.

Well, if such happiness could long endure,
By change unshaken; and from ills secure!
But soon the hours of social bliss must glide,
Like airy dreams, when day-spring blushes wide;
Here, when a few short years have run their round,
No longer shall this cheerful group be found;
The family, dispers'd in various climes,
Shall tell the tale, and mourn the alter'd times!
The hardy youth, that, in the brumal morn,
Amid the woodlands, heard the early horn,
Alternate twanging, aid the mingled sounds
Of dashing sportsmen, and of deep-mouth'd hounds;
That rov'd in Spring, 'neath arching trees unseen,
When Flora veil'd in purple vest the green,
And like the tranquil ether was his soul,
O'er which no dark'ning clouds were known to roll,...
Torn from his home, must feel each bosom pain,
Scale the white billows of the roaring main,
Or, ... lost his native peace, ... in fields afar,
Learn the destructive trade of iron war.

Such, REUBEN, was thy fate, my early friend!
O, could thy manes from the shades attend,
The muse to nobler numbers should aspire,
And sweep, with bold indignant hand, the lyre.
Past are the days of patriotic zeal,
When Britain's sons rejoic'd in Britain's weal;
When high-born Pow'r stretch'd out the liberal hand,
To comfort and to raise the Peasant band;
When simple Labour, toiling at the plough,
Wore gladsome smiles upon his sweltering brow;
Nor Pride nor Av'rice breath'd their blighting breath,
To blast the buds of tender hope with death;
Might forward stood, weak Property to guard,
And on the heel of Merit trod Reward.

Portentous over REUBEN'S natal hour
No ruin-threat'ning storm was seen to lour:
He view'd, before his unambitious eyes,
The scenes of humble competence arise;
The equal paths his ancestors had trac'd,
The prospects dear, that rural joys embrac'd!
Of souls congenial, ere the pow'rful light
Of sacred Reason shone with influence bright,
With pure attachment on the green we play'd,
And, crown'd with kingcups, thro' the meadows stray'd;
From fading hazle-boughs, with sylvan crook,
In leafy storms, the glowing, wild nuts shook,
And richer far than Croesus midst his store,
The golden treasure homeward, rattling, bore.
As years increas'd, increas'd our friendship too;
Nor cold neglect, or dark suspicion knew;
Alike to each young Fancy still inclin'd,
A ray of genius gleam'd on either mind;
Lovers of Nature, at her rustic shrine
We paid our vows, and shar'd her joys divine;
We felt her influence o'er our bosoms reign,
When dew-fring'd daisies whiten'd all the plain,
When rose in solemn pomp the full-orb'd moon,
Fair canopied, in silvery clouds, her throne;
Or howl'd in cavern clefts the midnight blast,
And from its bottom turn'd the watery waste,
While, round the skies, the lengthen'd thunders roll,
And vivid lightning kindle up the pole!
He lov'd the Muse, nor him did she disown,
To whom her haunts and loneliest walks were known,
The early woodman, thro' the thicket bound,
When vernal violets spread a carpet round,
Oft met him in the solitary glade,
Immers'd in thought, or saw him 'neath the shade
Of ancient oak, that overhangs the brook,
Attentive mutt'ring o'er some favourite book;
For not a swain, in all the country bred,
Like him could argue, or like him had read;
The rev'rend Vicar oft his pow'rs confest,
And rouz'd the emulation of his breast;
Nor could the squire, ... suppos'd of nobler mould,...
Th' inspiring tribute of his praise withhold.

Full soon in life, o'er REUBEN'S melting soul,
Youth's tend'rest passion, unsuspected stole;
Deep thro' the winding mazes of his heart
Had JENNY'S eyes discharg'd a tingling dart,
In ev'ry nerve its subtile poison glow'd,
And, love-inspir'd, his choicest numbers flow'd,
At field or fold, or where the pure streams gush,
Beneath the milk-white hawthorn's odorous bush,
While, deep embosom'd in the tufted boughs,
The ruddy linnet's moss-built nurs'ry grows,
From grey-eyed morn to closing eve he hung,
Rapt on her charms, and all her graces sung.
Hail, heav'nly Passion!  for, without thy aid,
The poet's art could never be display'd!
From Thee th' enthusiast all that fervour draws,
Which fires his verse, and wins the world's applause.
The brook, the wood, the solitary dell,
The winding lane, the water'd mead, could tell
How REUBEN lov'd, and how the pitying fair
Reliev'd his anguish, and dispell'd his care.
Soon Hymen led to consecrated bow'rs,
And strew'd their path with sweet, unfading flow'rs
Their love, ... O!  how unlike that grosser flame,
Which shines in courts, and falsifies its name,
By Fortune kindled, or by Fashion fed,
Where never Truth her hallow'd influence shed;
But formal Apathy attendance keeps,
And, o'er such unions, cold Indiff'rence sleeps!

A farm of small extent was REUBEN'S lot,
A scanty flock, and patrimonial cot;
One dappled steed was all he had to boast,
Oft rambling 'midst the broom and tall fern, lost;
Two fair-fac'd cows along his meadow fed,
Hous'd nightly in the orchard's friendly shed,
When wintry winds assail'd the forest steep,
And rock'd the guiltless cottagers to sleep;
But still, on summer nights, allow'd to rove
Along the hedge-rows, near the neighb'ring grove,
To crop the fragrant flow'rets as they spring,
And, punctual to the hour, their tribute bring,
To where the dame, with pail, accustom'd waits,
Gives the known call, and open sets her gates;
Her voice shrill echoes round the distant hills,
Their low, responsive, all the valley fills;
Amid her toils, a plaintive air she chaunts,
Join'd by the early birds, from woodland haunts;
High foams the grateful nectar's fuming store,
Till the full vessel will contain no more;
Then the cool dairy, by the riv'let clear,
Demands, till breakfast hour, her tending care.

Her spouse, meanwhile, supports, with equal glee,
The ceaseless round of honest husbandry;
Various the labours various seasons claim,
The process diff"rent, but the toil the same.
In winter, thro' the dark and drizzling day,
The flail and plough, by turns, his hand obey:
When fields are hid in snow, or sunk in mire,
The hedge, the ditch, his constant aid require;
Or new-fall'n lambs, a weak and trembling breed,
The hurdled cot and hourly nurture need.
When, like a blushing bride, the rosy morn,
First smil'd on floating fields of bending corn,
With poppies stain'd, or gold, or azure flow'rs,
Oppress'd with weight of night-refreshing show'rs,
Forth strode the mower, with his clouted shoes,
And, from the breathing clover, dash'd the dews,
While, where he treads, afar behind, is seen,
Along the lawn, a track of darker green,
By which the later swains, with quicken'd pace,
Pursue his progress, and his footsteps trace:
When fiercer suns matur'd the nodding grain,
And forth the village pour'd its jovial train,
The hind, untir'd, thro' many a harvest day,
Ambitious, bore the reaper's palm away.
Sweet to the parching plains are summer show'rs,
Sweet to the fainting trav'ller leafy bow'rs,
Sweet to the herds the gravel-channel'd rills,
Luxuriant vales, and ever-verdant hills;...
But sweeter far, than show'rs, or shades, or streams,
Or hills, or vales, where ling'ring Fancy dreams,
Was REUBEN'S home, when, blest, at evening's close,
He sought his frugal meal and calm repose,
Sure from her bright'ning eyes, who shar'd his heart,
To meet a welcome, destitute of art.

But power, too soon, its lawless arm extends,
And to its iron sceptre REUBEN bends!
His Lord, unfeeling, avaricious, vain,...
Was adding field to field, and plain to plain,
The fruitful acres he so long had till'd,
To other hands their annual produce yield;
Another shepherd now was taught to keep
Th' augmented flocks, that graz'd the upland steep:
No fav'rite lamb he boasts, nor round the door
The cack'ling poultry crave his bounty more;
No longer smoky racks with flitches bend,
Or nut-brown ale awaits the Christmas friend;
No hoarded brand to crown the wintry fire,
While mantling cups the rustic mirth inspire,
And village tales, and love-lorn songs of woe,
Melt the warm heart, and bid the bright eye flow,...
Another master owns his blissful cot,
And humblest servitude becomes his lot!
The independent spirit broken down,
Each comfort blasted!  ev'ry hope o'erthrown!
What now remain'd the aching breast to cheer,
While soft Affection shed the lib'ral tear,
And cold Philosophy in vain essay'd,
With languid lore, the sinking soul to aid?

One summer morn, along his native plain,
In proud battalia, march'd the martial train,
Bent to the neighb'ring town; ... their glitt'ring arms
And flowing banners spread illusive charms;
The shrilly fifes arous'd the country far,
And thund'ring drums proclaim'd the notes of war;
Tho' sad his heart, by recent pangs opprest,
The strong emotion agitates his breast;
Despair impell'd, ... away his crook he threw,
And bade the pastoral life a long adieu!

The giddy schoolboy, thus, the painted race
Of butterflies, allures, to urge the chase,...
Broke from restraint, and all the little cares
That Negligence or Disobedience bears,...
Till far from home, bewilder'd and alone,
Desponding! ... lost! ... he sits him down to moan.

Unusual passions through his bosom stray,
While rigid Duty calls him far away,
Destruction's sanguinary steps to trace,
And aid the carnage of the human race;
But strong affection o'er our ills will rise,
And virtuous minds unite in firmer ties:
In all his sorrows JENNY bore a part,
And follow'd REUBEN with an aching heart,
Till the dark day of separation came,
Fatal to Love and Friendship's sacred flame!
When he was summon'd to those hostile shores,
Where fell Bellona all her legions pours:
Then JENNY to her native vale return'd,
And there, in hopeless solitude, she mourn'd;
Deep in her breast Misfortune's vultures prey'd,
And soon in dust the lovely victim laid,
Still near the church-yard path her grave is seen,...
A swelling hillock cloth'd with vernal green,...
And there the swains, on Sundays, ling'ring by,
Point to the spot, and heave the pitying sigh!

Hark!  how, on Afric's coast, the clang of arms
Wakens the world! ... while British valour warms,
Onwards, behold th' embattled hosts advance,
The pride of England, and the scourge of France,
While the harsh trumpet, from its winding throat,
Pours, o'er the tented field, its martial mote,
Impatient coursers wheel, with fiery bound,
In dusty clouds, and shake the solid ground.
In firm array, the dauntless squadrons move,
To where, in dreadful order, rang'd above,
The brazen tubes of fate tremendous lour,
Their thunders yield, and rain a murd'rous show'r,
Thro' smoke and flame, that shroud the vale beneath,
Thin the wedg'd ranks, and glut the realms of death.

Resistless now, the crumbling breach they dare,
With desperate step, and hearts unus'd to fear,
While thirsty swords in clatt'ring contact meet,
And slipp'ry gore betrays th' impatient feet.
Mountains of dead a human bulwark form,
Obstruct the gates, and check the sanguine storm,
Till Albion's sons the dreaded charge renew,
And to proud Vict'ry a broad passage hew.

So down the Alps a snowy globe descends,
Beneath whose weight the crashing forest bends;
Some rocky peak its sudden shock sustains;
And in its thundering course awhile detains;
But yields at length, ... th' augmented mass prevails,
And bears destruction to th' affrighted dales!

The sun blush'd crimson for the crimes of man,
As down the west his evening course he ran,
And darkness, gradual, o'er the mangled plain,
In solemn sadness drew her sable train;
Wide o'er the fatal soil, confus'dly spread,
The dying, hopeless, groan'd among the dead,
While no lov'd form, of relative or friend,
Tearful, approach'd, the last kind aid to lend,
Rais'd the faint head, or stanch'd, with lenient art,
The life-blood ebbing from the fev'rish heart.
Predestin'd on a foreign shore to die,
The young, the brave, unknown, neglected lie;
While, on their native land, ... a mournful train!
Widows and orphans, pour their tears in vain.
Not Caesar's self, nor Philip's frantic son,
Nor the mad Swede, had nobler trophies won;
But Fate, with undiscriminating pow'r,
Obscur'd the splendors of this golden hour:
Stretch'd on the cold, damp sod, with wounds undrest,
Bare to night dews his palpitating breast,
Fix'd on the scowling skies his rheumy eyes,
The once-blest Village Swain, unnotic'd, lies,
With lab'ring gasp, he draws his shorten'd breath,
Converging to the silent shades of death!

O, say, what Fiend, with hate infernal fraught,
Of horrid war th' accursed science taught?
Bade man his brother's lawful rights invade,
And in his bosom plunge the fateful blade,
Then varnish'd o'er the deed with some proud name
Of deathless Glory, and immortal Fame!

Enough, my Muse!  nor stain the rural verse
With themes e'en Fancy shudders to rehearse:
Yet Sympathy's soft eye must overflow
At War's rude havoc, ... source of human woe!
In vain will Charity extend her hand!
In vain soft Pity try her influence bland?...
Unseen Distress in haunts obscure must pine,
And Virtue sacrifice at Sorrow's shrine!
So he, who wields the wond'rous system, wills,...
The creature Man but his design fulfils.

Not that the song condemns the hostile strife
Of valorous Britons, prodigal of life,
When fierce Invasion threats their sea-girt shore,
And proud Injustice bids the battle roar:
No!  let them bare the sword, and couch the lance,
And, fir'd with patriot energy, advance
From cities crowded, and the calm retreat,
Where immemorial Peace has fix'd her seat,
Then let them hasten to their country's call,...
Waves, families, and friends, their dearest all
Demand their aid, ... their father's laurel'd shade
Shall smile, exultant, from th' Elysian glades;
Assisting Heav'n their dauntless hearts inspire,
To scourge the faithless nations in their ire;
The oak-leav'd garland shall their brows adorn,
And Fame proclaim their deeds to ages yet unborn!
