The Sun now faintly streaks the East with gray,
And evening dews refresh the thirsty earth,
The weary rustic homeward bends his way,
To drown the thoughts of past fatigue in mirth.

Now too the plodding cit his shop forsakes,
To strive to pass an hour in social joy;
But, dead to mirth, to trade alone he wakes,
And fraudful gains his groveling thoughts employ.

The deep-read scholar now his mind refines,
O'er the dim lamp seeks intellectual light,
Brings the rich ores of science from their mines,
And spreads them wide, to feast the ravish'd sight.

In close cabal now hungry harpies sit,
And study how to swell corruption's flood,
Pension vile slaves, for ev'ry mischief fit,
And drench their daggers in their country's blood.

The candidate, to enter honour's door,
Now sells or mortgages for ready pelf,
Buys venal votes as he would buy a whore,
Then to some scoundrel statesman sells himself.

Now rogues in senate virtue's charms display,
And sordid slaves for heav'n-born FREEDOM roar,
Low bend their knees to delegated sway,
And sell their country for a "grasp of ore."

The politician now, o'er coffee's steam,
In state Arcana seems an adept grown,
And while his brains with air-form'd visions teem,
He settles Europe's fate, but scorns his own.

The learned fool, whose mind is amply stor'd
With loads of lumber, from the fathers brought,
Now hears lewd stories at some festive board,
Shakes his dull head, and looks as if he thought.

With eager hurry to the ball now fly
The light-heel'd coxcomb, and light-hearted toast;
While others, graver, to the play-house hie,
Where o'er the scene stalks Hamlet's dreadful ghost.

The sons of Belial now in crowds repair
To some lewd brothel, where destruction reigns,
Imbibe contagion from the venal fair,
And purchase transient bliss with lasting pains.

These scenes I shun, nor tread gay vice's halls,
Where white-rob'd virtue meets her fatal doom;
But, musing in this lone Cathedral's walls
I hold my much-lov'd converse with the tomb.

Hail, sacred place!  thou nurse of pious dread!
Parent of wisdom!  Virtue's best defence!
Here, while with awful reverence I tread,
I view with apathy the joys of sense.

On the strong wings of contemplation borne,
The heav'n-rapt mind converses with the sky,
And whilst she's taught life's empty joys to scorn,
She learns that best of lessons &mdash; how to die.

O may that lesson ever sway my mind,
Glow in my soul, and in my life appear!
And may I still to vice's charms be blind,
While scenes like these engage my thoughts or ear!

Here sleep the chequer'd characters of life,
The wit, the fool, the coward, and the brave,
The faithless husband, and the tender wife,
The son of virtue, and th' insidious knave.

In this dread place some worthy pair may rest,
Whose faithful breasts a mutual flame enjoy'd;
But when they thought to be supremely bless'd
Grim death stepp'd in, and all their hopes destroy'd.

Th' insatiate miser, whose all-grasping soul
Not e'en Golconda's treasures could content,
Whom honour could not bind, nor fear controul,
Here lies within his narrow tenement.

The pamper'd prelate, void of christian deeds,
Who scorn'd the widow's sigh, the orphan's tear,
Whose gilded car was drawn by fiery steeds,
Now high repast for hungry worms, lies here.

The venal lawyer, in whose hollow mind
Fraud rear'd his throne, and craft his engines spread,
Who treated truth's sweet voice as vagrant wind,
And spurn'd her lore; here rests his recreant head.

And here may sleep some high-born haughty maid,
A fair and well-form'd piece of beauteous dust!
Whose bright, love-darting eyes e'en hermits sway'd,
Though lost her name by time's corroding rust.

The patriot firm, humanity's chief pride,
May here repose; whom FREEDOM gladly owns,
Who bravely stemm'd oppression's rapid tide,
And made proud tyrants tremble on their thrones.

Th' ambitious statesman, who, devoid of shame,
Would raise his fortunes on his country's fall,
And scorn those joys that spring from honest fame,
As he despis'd, is now despis'd by all.

E'en scepter'd monarchs, or some monarch's mate,
Kings of an hour, and pageants of a day!
Divested here of all their pride and state,
Must mix their royal dust with vulgar clay.

Some feeble, headstrong prince may here repose,
Too soft for sway, too proud for private life;
Who plung'd his kingdom in the deepest woes,
Who scorn'd his people, but &mdash; who lov'd his wife.

Who banish'd truth and loyalty the court,
Who hugg'd rank rebels to his royal breast,
Who chas'd true patriots for a fav'rite's sport,
And female counsels still esteem'd the best.

Who saw his subjects grievances unmov'd,
Who felt no care for pangs they suffer'd long,
Who let his servants plunder unreprov'd,
Yet flatt'ry told him, he could do no wrong.

Little in great things, and in small things great,
High objects he'd despise, low undertake;
Tho' legislation's arts he could not treat,
Yet plans he could design, and buttons make.

Yet might this prince be good and gracious styl'd,
As living princes never want for praise;
So tyrant RICHARD flatt'ry's voice term'd mild,
And pedant JAMES, the phoenix of his days.

The bard, whose thoughts could soar with rapid force,
Beyond the limits of this nether sphere,
And bear away the palm in fancy's course,
Revels in splendor, while his bones lie here.

And here sleeps SWIFT &mdash; Be still, presumptuous thoughts!
Dare not in judgment on his fame to sit!
Nor say, while thousands sanctify his faults,
Hate made the patriot, and contempt the wit.

Yet o'er his grave shall sweetest flow'rets bloom,
For fancy's varying rays his pen impress'd,
And though defrauded of the promis'd tomb,
His image lives within each grateful breast.

The lord and peasant, bridegroom and the bride,
In awful silence here their limbs repose:
And here lie friendly by each other's side
Those who, when living, were the fiercest foes.

Say then, vindictive sons of hate and strife,
Down time's vast current who are driving fast;
Say, what avail your ceaseless broils through life,
Since here your foes and you must come at last?

And you, ye fair!  gay nature's sweetest flow'rs!
O heed the counsel of the moral muse!&mdash;
Let wisdom's lamp enlighten all your hours:
Let virtue's landscape limit all your views.

For, ah!  your ebbing sands decline apace,
And soon the rav'nous grave his prey will seek;
Then shall be fled each love-inspiring grace,
Dim the bright eye, and pale the blushing cheek.

Ye sons of wild ambition, what avail
Your vain pursuits at restless fancy's cell?
Gain all you can, the cold grave will not fail
To be the grand receptacle of all.

Yet e'en in death life's tragic farce is play'd,
A farce that's borrow'd from the church of Rome;
Pride's children, by their rage of pomp still sway'd,
Will go in splendor, even to the tomb.

Ah!  what avail the mockery of woe,
The costly trappings, and the sable hearse,
Whose plumes nod vain ambition to and fro,
The sculptur'd monument, and flatt'ry's verse?

Are things like these congenial to the mind?
And can they peace in guilty bosoms fix?
Can reason in such gewgaws comfort find?
Or can they blunt those stings which vice inflicts?

Ah, no.  In torrents when afflictions pour
On our bare heads, and, overcharg'd with grief,
We sink oppress'd; we feel in that sad hour,
Virtue alone can give our souls relief.

Or if, prone stretch'd upon the bed of pain,
The good man's pangs his weeping friends deplore,
Resign'd, he suffers, scorning to complain,
Nor fears his fate when time shall be no more.

Not so the wretch with guilt and fear oppress'd:
While to his mind his past offences rise,
All hell seems flaming in his tortur'd breast,
And all its terrors are before his eyes.

Gloomy despair excludes soft mercy's ray,
And while no med'cines can his pangs assuage,
Death, like a bloodhound, marks his horrid way,
Seizes his victim, and quite gluts his rage.

O for that noble phrensy of the soul,
Which mighty SHAKESPEAR, fancy's fav'rite, fir'd!
Then should the muse her sacred tome unrol,
And paint mens mad pursuit, by vice inspir'd.

Or did I but possess that "reach of thought,"
Which gilds thy moral page, O plaintive GRAY!
A piece should in invention's loom be wrought
To charm to virtue those who'd gone astray.

In vain I wish, in vain I breathe the pray'r;
My wish, my pray'r no heav'n-born maid approves;
To gain that glorious height I must despair,
Nor feel that rage which real genius moves.

But lo!  while thus I pour my artless lays,
And stretch my thoughts beyond my feeble reach,
Where death his sable, conqu'ring flag displays,
I hear, or seem to hear, this awful speech.

"Cease, cease to weep the happy living dead,
But to the dead who're living give thy tears;
Pray error's children into truth were led,
That, void of guilt, they may be void of fears.

"For soon will come the great, momentous day,
When all the rich, poor, old, young, wise and fair,
Must shake off all their tenements of clay,
And to the silent, dreary grave repair.

"Survey the circle of thy much-lov'd friends,
Who fall, like Autumn's leaves, beneath death's stroke:
E'en now, thy bleeding heart the tyrant rends,
And leaves thee mourning like the blasted oak.

"Yet cease &mdash; submit; &mdash; for all must meet their fate;
And know, O man!  whate'er GOD does is right;
He makes pale death ope life's immortal gate,
And paths of darkness lead to realms of light.

"Thou too, whose thoughts on life's poor drama flow,
Whose luxury of sorrow makes thee dumb,
Though thou with vigour, youth, and health now glow,
Shalt soon a pallid, clay-cold corse become.

"Then when some friend thy humble grave draws near,
For splendid tombs are for the great alone,
He'll heave one sigh, and shed one passing tear,
And read these lines inscrib'd upon the stone.

THE EPITAPH.
"Here lies within our parent earth's cold womb
What once was man.  The body's heav'n-born guest,
Freed from her prison, now expects her doom,
With dubious fears, yet humble hope possess'd.

"MORTAL IMMORTALS!  This great truth revere!
Virtue begets fair bliss, and foul vice, woe,
This our Bard taught; but what his merits were,
The last great day alone will fully shew."
