All hail, of heav'n-taught sages wisest, best,
Eblana's Leeches!  well have ye atchiev'd,
Well ended great exploit; full-bottoms spurn'd,
Which long the craniums of your bigot sires
Opprest umbrageous, horrent freight of hair.
Not with more weight, the drifted depth of snows
Possesses Alpine ridge, or Haemus' peak,
Nor whiter seems in hue, than Peruke borne
On noddle of sedate practitioner;
Nor chills the Traveller with more fatal damp.

A wizard old bears mighty sway with men,
And Custom is he hight.  This Magus dire
Erst, mustering spell mysterious, wrapt the head
Of Paean's votarist in unsightly bush;
Whence, shorn of fair proportion, rueful, pale,
(Eclipse disastrous!) peeps the lengthen'd face,
Unlovely, undesir'd, ill-omen'd sight;
Like bird of midnight from her ivy bower.
Beneath the fleecy burden long they groan'd,
Deny'd each honour of a modern pate;
The Queue prolix extended; and the Club,
Bologna-sausage shaming, snare of maids,
Perus'd with timid, nor incurious glance;
The Lawyer's tails, that like twin bobbins show
From housewife's cushion pendant.  Hence they mourn'd
Expulsion sad from sudorific dance,
From Misses' tea-table, and every scene,
Where dress secures admission.  Hapless they!
With jaundic'd matron scandal talk'd, in room
That reek'd of med'cines all a summer's eve;
Or toil'd at cards with wither'd dowager,
Long wintering out a young man's revenue;
Till one of manly thewes, and courage firm,
Bespake his brethren (Heav'n the champion rous'd
To pierce the Gothic darkness, whose thick gloom
Obscur'd the Graces medical, and dispel
The Cloud of brooding Perukes) thus he said:

"Friends!  Brethren!  Paean's Sons!  once blooming youths,
Bugbears of children now, and scorn of maids;
With fashion shall Hygeia warfare wage?
Does Phoebus from his tripod, 'broider'd suit,
And bag, and sword-knot sternly interdict?
Forbid it, Gods!  let 'Pothecaries shun
Such sparkling honours (they, whose squalid task,
Or clystic, or emetic, dreads a stain)
For black funereal, or dirt-veiling drab;
Meet emblem of their function:  while the Leech
In splendid colours flames, or neat and gay,
Bule, yellow, red and green.  Or should the Fates
Reluctant doom our limbs to sable weeds;
Yet shall, at least, the Bag, appendage grave,
Adorn our wigs, the rapier grace our thighs;
While to our hands the friendly muff preserves
Their milky smoothness, and their tangent powers;
To trace the pulse blue-heaving, or explore,
Exalted privilege, less obvious charms.
Nor is the bag not typic of our art:
Fitted it is for ornament and use;
To grace the wig, within its sable womb
Medicaments to bear, or haply serve
Applied to homelier end, should dire distress,
Stern mother of invention, so command."

He ended, plaudits follow'd, as from men,
Who thus reflected view'd their proper thought;
When thus a Senior of the croud pursu'd:

"O Son!  thy sentence capital perforce
I must applaud, and generous bold emprize;
From Gothic bondage, Grizzle foul, obscene,
To free the sapient head.  Myself will tell,
If rising woe can tell, what chanc'd me late.
Long had I mourn'd, beneath a fleece of hair,
Instinct with powder, ample and outspread;
With foretop peering, om'nous o'er my bow'r,
Rough as the plumage of a Friezland hen,
Or quills upon the fretful porcupine.
A lazy Crone, a round and antient Nurse,
Hands me an ample vase, replete with streams
Saline; streams that in Paean's mystic rite
Claim dearest, best inspection.  I receiv'd,
With hand not careless, and with pious awe,
Upheld th' orac'lous fluid:  not the priest,
Of Jewish, or of Pagan lore, receiv'd
With holier zeal the fuming censer, fill'd
With spicy drugs from Araby the blest;
Than I the vase perus'd, intent to read
The Fates; in what the scum portends, and what
The sediment; the colour what, and taste;
Digestion or concoction.  Dire disgrace!
Scarce can I speak; the fore-top of my wig,
Prone o'er my forehead flaring, deep immerst
Drank the prognostic; and meanders vile
Insinuate cours'd my cheeks.  But say, compeers!
Will not this mighty change, so sudden wrought,
Move gaping wonder, scoff, and ridicule,
Lament, and outcry loud, and furious rage?
Hear then the council, Friends, of temp'rate age.
By slow degrees enure the croud to change,
That gradual comes unfear'd.  Suppose we hang
Ev'n to our present wigs, addition quaint,
Bags of all sizes, multiform and mix;
Full-dress and Rose.  Our antique Brush shall save
From tongue of obloquy, with sacred shade,
The modern ornament:  till crafty hand
Shall, lock by lock, and hair by hair, abate
The bushy nuisance; and refine it down
To Scratch mechanic, or to squirely Bob&mdash;"

He more had talk'd (as age is prone to talk)
A youth indignant on his calm harrangue
Impetuous broke, and shameless thus pursued:

"Who talks of Bob-wigs?  Gods!  confound a thought
So poor, so vile!  To Orcus with the crew
Of Bobs and Scratches!  rascal trumpery!
No, let us rather choose through full Rotund,
Adorn'd with bag and rapier, all at once
To force resistless way; in goodly rows,
To sounds of urinal and mortar sweet,
In Dorian measure marching; the new attempt
Shall strike the world with wonder and dismay,
And chain calumnious tongue.  Besides, who dares
Reproach?  For hold not we the sheers of Fate?"

He ended frowning; and his brow denounc'd
Enormous bag, and innovation dire
On ancient usage.
The sentence pleas'd the million; puissant minds
In desp'rate deeds delight.

Thy Calends, August!  were the day decreed,
The great, th' important day, big with the fate
Of Bags and Paean's Sons:  for then intense
The youth of Dublin croud, (a brilliant train)
Rotunda, spacious dome!  frequent and full,
While Clio's trump some lofty Bard inspires
With note harmonious, and no common blast
Of Albion's happiness, and Brunswick's line.

The solemn morn arrived; and croud on croud,
A waving sea of heads, assembled stood
In fearful expectation.  Paean's Sons
Appear'd, a goodly band, in meet array,
And seemly phalanx marching.  Every tongue
Was hush'd, nor breath itself was heard to pass
The barrier of the lips, attention strange!
And holy rev'rence, child of great event!

Apothecaries boys (like Henchmen) march'd,
With clank of mortar, dulcet pestlery.
Them follow'd lusty wenches, and in scorn
To mop-sticks fix'd those abdicated wigs,
Which late physicians bore; now, sad reverse,
Unpowder'd, frizzled, curls upstarting rough,
They sweep the dust.  Meantime, their whilom Lords,
With graceful gesture, goodly, grave and prim,
In mournful finery, or mourning fine,
Sword, bag, and black full-trim'd, mov'd two and two,
Harmonious; passing rare, such amity!
In outward show, they seem'd, or Ushers staid,
Or Lords in waiting, at the dolorous court
Of him, the Lover of Proserpina.

Now foremost in the sacred rolls of Fame,
O'er ides of March, or twelfth of July ninety,
Shall stand the first of August, glorious day!
It made the race of Brunswick Kings, and free'd
From wigs, a Gothic yoke, the healing band.
