CANTO THE FIRST.
In the dead of the night, when your ghosts rise and walk,
And the figures, on tomb-stones, find tongues with to talk,
The bards in the Abbey, like birds of a feather,
At roost, with their coxcombs all nodding together;
A goose of a gander, ne'er plum'd by the Graces
His head popping in, pok'd his nose in their faces.

"Who, the deuce, have we here?" cried they, strait, in amaze,
As they all started back at the goose-cap to gaze.
Then round him they gather'd, and ask'd whence he came
His country, condition, and what was his name?&mdash;
"How!  what!  don't you know, then," he cried, in a rage,
"The poet, philosopher, wit of the age.
Th' historian, the critic, physician, what-not,
Had not those James's powders soon sent me to pot?
I'm Oliver Goldsmith! &mdash; Why look you so queer?
As much as to say, What the devil do you here?
That you all are curs'd envious, I see by your look,
And grudge me so lofty a place in your nook.
But no matter for that; Nol cares not a damn;
You may scowl as you please; by the Lord, here I am.
To shine thus among you, when living, 'tis true,
I expected as little as any of you;
A drudge at all work, when, from morning to night,
Carnan and George Kearsley compell'd me to write,
God knows, about things which, a body may say,
I knew, though a Doctor, no more of than they.
But, whate'er I was, I would have you to know
That I'm now one of you, and am here statu quo.
My figure was plac'd by the bricklayer and mason,
For children, and fools, and old women to gaze on;
With a head-piece of stone, that, as good as the best,
Is as hard, and will last me, as long as the rest;
Exalted on high in a rare central niche;
Where you now, if you like it, may all kiss my breech.
Johnny Gay, who beneath me, here, lies at his ease,
It is plain I could piss on, if so I should please,
And as for James Thomson, and Nicholas Rowe,
In the corner they're thrust, as at best but so, so.
Nay, even for you, sir, who strut there so big,
Will. Shakespeare, I value you not of a fig.
At comedy, tragedy, pastoral, play,
Your comb I could cut any hour of the day.
Old Falstaff's eclips'd by my young Tony Lumpkin,
And your clowns all outwitted by my country bumpkin.
Next for you, Master Milton, that stand there behind,
In your ear I could whisper a piece of my mind;
And tho' cyder-Philips, your bully, stand nigh you,
At versification I boldly defy you.
Your blank-verse inditers are generally those,
Who cannot write rhyme, and so scribble in prose,
Likewise Monsieur Jordain, that provident cit,
Who left off his trade to set up for a wit.
A thousand such lines as such poets indite,
While I stand on one leg, like a crane, I could write.
For you Chaucer, Spenser, and Drayton, and Cowley,
You are match'd and o'ermatch'd by our modern old Rowley:
And as for your Priors, your Shadwells and Butlers;
Let 'em go and write posies for goldsmiths and cutlers."

"Impertinent puppy!" quoth proud Matthew Prior,
Who, piqu'd at his insolence, instant took fire,
"Were my night-cap but loose I would throw't in your phiz&mdash;
Do, Dryden, do, crack that vain coxcomb of his."
Dry, hot as himself, strait went to't ding-dong;
And their heads rung as each had been rhyming a song;
When, as it so happened, there lay in the lurch,
A LONDON Reviewer lock'd into the church;
Who, hearing the noise and beholding the scene,
Opportunely the combatants stepp'd in between.

"For God's sake, good folks," said he, "why all this rout?
Do you know where you are, and what 'tis about?
Your noddles, tho' hard ones, may yet get a fraction,
Without fear or wit, if you thus come to action.
By me be advised, put an end to the fray,
And listen a little to what I've to say.
Noll Goldsmith is right, and, altho' new and trim,
You should not all keep such a carping at him:
When his new coat's as rusty as yours he'll be quiet,
And you be no longer dispos'd thus to riot:
If he be unworthy a place in your dome,
What think you of Hull, and of Hoole, and of Home?
With a long train of others &mdash; nay, faith, I'm not humming&mdash;
All just as good poets, that hither are coming?
For know that no bard such a blockhead can be,
But he has admirers, great blockheads as he;
And tho' none of these a stone statue might raise him,
His blockheaded bookseller needs must bepraise him.
The bust well engraved, in a proper position,
Is a sure card to puff off another edition.
The stone mason's bill, to whatever amount,
With the printer's and stationer's, brought to account:
Then kindly make room to consort with their betters,
Our modern pretenders to genius and letters."

At this the deaf auditors prick'd up their ears,
Their features, though fix'd, all expressing their fears.

"How's this?" and "what's this?" and "what says he?" went round,
Above, and about, and beneath holy ground;
So jealous they were of their honour and glory;
While thus Aristarchus went on with his story.

"In the first place, good people, make room for Hugh Kelly:
At least for his head, if you can't for his belly.
I wonder, indeed, he was not here before;
As the bucket he kick'd, now, a twelvemonth, or more.
He needs must exhibit a singular head,
Who wrote ye more volumes than ever he read.
Next make room for Paul, or you'll all have a jostle;
Paul Whitehead, more proud than was Paul the apostle.
In a corner too fix him, to humour his pride,
Lest his name-sake the Laureat, be chumm'd by his side.
Above him make room for a prouder than he,
(If, dead or alive, any prouder can be)
A very phenomenon! &mdash; Heaven's our protector!&mdash;
A bard that was, also, an India Director;
Rara avis in terris, so like a black swan,
By Kenrick's keen goose quill cut up, dead and gone,
Poor Hawksworth, th' advent'rer, of whom Jemmy Twitcher
The vanity tickled, by tickling his pitcher;
A milk sop, that dar'd, as is left on record,
His GOD to give up, to get drunk with a Lord.
A similar fopling in sattin and silk,
Next comes Molly Grey, with his measure of milk,
His muse, aping art, in the fulness of pride,
Frizz'd in ton with but nature's nine hairs on a side.
Place this pretty bard, if you will, in the porch;
His cradle a church-yard, his coffin a church.
Room next for th' Adelphi, unnatural brothers,
Belov'd by themselves, as detested by others;
With a kick and a lick from a foot or a staff,
Tumble these in some hole to make decency laugh.
Hey!  who have we here?  Lo!  on tip toe he comes,
As he walks on his toes, he may sit on his thumbs;
Whether dead or alive there's no mortal can tell,
As he slipp'd through a noose betwixt heav'n and hell;
Observe how he looks, like a sanctified prig,
A corded Adonis with colliflower'd wig,
A niche he demands as a servant of God,
If the devil don't come to demand Doctor Dodd."

These last words had hardly come out of his mouth,
When a hurricane blew from the north to the south;
With the east and the west it appear'd too to grapple,
And threatened King Henry the Seventh's crazy chapel:
When Shakepeare, with countenance stern, yet benign,
Wav'd his hand with an energy truly divine;
Bade silence around, when the parties divided,
And the tempest, tho' rais'd by the devil, subsided.

"Can this," quoth the bard, "I've been hearing, be true?
Are we to be pester'd by such a vile crew?
By dotarts, and dunces, and petulant prigs,
That only are known by their caps and their wigs?
God knows how the dean and the chapter may class us,
With the tag-rag and bob-tail of modern Parnassus.
Ere I will associate with rascals so shabby,
I'll pack up my alls, and good-by to the Abbey:
To Stratford-on-Avon, on ten toes I'll trot,
Content with my bones in oblivion to rot."

So saying, he cast round his eye with a frown,
As if from his pedestal just stepping down:
When Jonson popp'd up from the pavement his head,
Where snug he has lain ever since he was dead.
A simple square free-stone plac'd over his grave,
With, "O rare Ben Jonson," his name just to save;
Contented to crumble in silence to dust,
While behind the back-door, in the dark, stuck his bust.
"Dear Will," quoth old Ben, his friend Shakespeare in view,
"What is't, my good comrade, you're going to do?
'Tis cruel to leave your old friends in the lurch
In the aisle of an old, cold, cathedral church,
E'en let the vain fools that are coming have room;
The memento's but short that depends on a tomb.
Consider their writings will all be forgotten
Before their rump-bone or their trotters are rotten;
Let them all have a busto, if that will content 'em;
While aere perennius is our monumentum.
Besides, while the rabble you mean to avoid,
You may fly from a Churchill, Thornton and Lloyd;
Ere long David Garrick, if death do not wrong us,
Will beg, steal or purchase a place here among us;
And he, who once stole your Promethean fire,
Dead Falstaff again with true life to inspire,
When his own is departed, will hither repair;
And, if Shakespeare is gone, my good God!  how he'll stare!
Then stay, my dear fellow, nor leave your high station,
That does us an honour, as well as the nation."&mdash;

"Brother Ben, replies Shakespeare, you're much in the right,
On this provocation I'll not take my flight;
In hopes that some worthies, among such a number,
May make us amends for such villainous lumber.
'Tis pleasant I own, to behold by my side
Mrs. Pritchard as modest and meek as a bride:
To Garrick a niche I could spare very well,
But give him an inch and he'll soon take an ell:
Not fonder of money than absolute rule,
He'd elbow e'en me, ere 'tis long, off my stool,
So vain and conceited the jubilee elf,
He'd set up at once for Will Shakespeare himself!&mdash;
Of all imitators, and I have had many,
That Kenrick, 'tis true, comes the nearest of any;
And he's no mean archer, Ben Johnson, you know,
That aims at my long shafts, and can bend my strong bow;
But let him go make mathematical rules,
While he swears that all poets are natural fools;
Ungratefully slights the sweet fancies of nature;
To feed on the thistles of science and satire.
In the progress of time, yet, there still may come others,
Whom you and I, Ben, may bid welcome, as brothers;
So, I think, on considering duly the case,
I will tarry a while, as I stand, in my place;
At least 'till to Phoebus we make application,
For him to determine each author's true station;
Mean time let the dean and the chapter stand neuter,
That none such a dust may kick up for the future."

The bustos all bow'd, and in silence departed,
Each man to the back-ground from which he had started;
Respectfully waiting the doom of Apollo,
Regarding the rank of the writers that follow.


CANTO THE SECOND
Next day the stone Bustos, each other all greeting,
Renew'd the confab of their overnight's meeting;
For a call of the house, when, a motion was made,
That the matter before them in form might be laid;
The learn'd and unlearned, the dull and the witty,
Then form'd themselves into a gen'ral committee;
Some most self-sufficient, and some with less pride,
On Shakespeare's shrewd hint to debate and decide.

Mistaking his scheme for a quartering muster;
They thought that he meant to new groupe the whole cluster;
When some, who now strut in conspicuous places,
Might perhaps stand less forward in Phoebus' good graces;
To ask then, of him, to assign their true station,
To those appear'd dangerous who fear'd degradation.
Tom Shadwell, for instance, well pleas'd with his laurel,
Shew'd no disposition with any to quarrel.
"Why should we, said he, be to carping at others?
Why can't we live loving, like brothers with brothers?
Against such appeal I hold up both my hands:
Let Goldsmith, with ev'ry man, stand where he stands;
For my part, I envy not Shakespeare himself,
Tho' plac'd, a plain bust, on a little top shelf.
Beneath pompous Prior; nor grudge I the labour
Or art, that's bestow'd on my lofty next neighbour."

"You be damn'd with your we's, and your brotherhood too,"
Quoth Prior, "Who calls cater-cousins with you?
Make free with your equals, if any there be,
And don't talk of us, Sir, in speaking of me.
Confound him, I say, for his art and his labour,
Whoever he was, that made ME your next neighbour."&mdash;

Thus saying, his pale nose he turn'd up and sneer'd;
When Shakespeare good-natur'dly thus interfer'd:

"My friends and good neighbours (for such let us be,
And, about ourselves talking e'en let us say we)
Like a fox-hunting member mistaking a motion,
You seem, of my plan, to have form'd a wrong notion.
Think not that I see the least sign, in your faces,
Of rashly resigning your posts and your places;
For fools we shou'd doubtless deserve to be noted,
If these we give up, whosoever promoted:
My project was merely a plan of prevention;
'Gainst future intruders my only intention.
On which I, to Phoebus, my pray'r have preferr'd,
And stated our case, which he graciously heard:
His godship declaring this state of the nation
Of poets, he'd take into consideration,
On pressing him closely a short day to fix,
He promis'd to be here precisely at six:
As good as his word too you find him, my friends,
Through yonder glass-window behold he descends."

Apollo alighted, and properly greeted,
On his tripod, brought with him, all begg'd he'd be seated,
In glory array'd by the light of the sun,
Of oyer and terminer sessions begun:
Already dispatch'd, to assemble before him,
His summons, to those who affect to adore him;
Hence both quick and dead, as if 'twere the last day,
To Westminster-Abbey came trudging away.

The next that appear'd set the whole court a staring;
Strahan, the printer, came lugging a huge Greenland bear in;
For none at first sight could conceive 'twas a man,
Nay Shakespeare mistook't for his own Caliban;
'Till a phiz, which tho' dirty, was something like human,
Prov'd he possibly might have been born of a women.
So, growling and grumbling, he put in his claim,
When all, by the manner, conjectur'd his name:
His long polysyllables pouring so pat in,
From his Lexicon, written in pure English-Latin.
Nay, like to Sir Hudibras, boasting to speak,
He affected to gruntle in Hebrew and Greek:
Of the former, however, the learn'd Bishop Louth
Declares not a word e'er came out of his mouth.

Of a busto so brutal the place to determine,
And yet not to rank it with rats and such vermin,
On the ground he was station'd, to humour his pride,
Of Shakespeare's tall pedestal close to one side;
On t' other a savage of similar breeding,
As fam'd, in his time, for his writing and reading;
On the Bard's Muse of Fire these curst cold commentators,
For his herald supporters, in figure and features,
Like Lion and Unicorn, fam'd for grimaces,
Were doom'd at each other to stand making faces.

A highlander next, in his bonnet and plaid,
Come spouting such stuff, Phoebus thought he was mad;
Not that Mac his own jargon made so much his boast,
As the ditties, forsooth, of his grandfather's ghost.
A Scald, whose old ballads he English'd from Erse,
Into bombast and fustian, between prose and verse;
Though he swore, a true Epic, old Ossian's Fingal,
Beat the Iliad, th' Aeneid, the Lusiad and all;
Nay, what is still stranger, the people believ'd him,
Till Kenrick stepp'd forward, and first undeceiv'd 'em;
When the fools, once so fond, bestow'd many a curse on
The high-flown heroics of Jamy Macpherson.

For Ossian a niche he demands, and a shelf,
At the bag-piper's breech, for a bust of himself.
But Phoebus declar'd that enormous the crime
To coop under cover two bards so sublime;
So order'd them both to be mounted aloof,
And plac'd, side by side, on the top of the roof;
Assigning for reason, these geniuses there
Might the better converse with the sprites of the air.

Fine as si'-pence next struts in the famous Tom D'Urfy,
No!  No, begging pardon, 'tis Squire Murphy,
With a barrister's bow, as he open'd his brief,
A niche he demanded as play-wright in chief,
At tragedy, comedy, farce, prose or rhime,
Declaring himself the first bard of the time.
But ere my lord judge could well make a reply,
"A pick-pocket!  Seize him!" the general cry:
Through the aisles it resounded, from one to the other,
Nay, the folks in the cloisters were put in a pother;
Sir Cloudsley himself looking small, though so big,
For fear he should lose his fine, full-bottom'd wig:
Here and there while the vergers, like sly sons of whores,
Lest the varlet should 'scape, ran to shut all the doors.
"My tragedy-handkerchief give me," says one,
"My comedy-mask, hat, and sword," cries old Lun:
A third, fourth, and fifth, "You may well look so fine,
When the clothes on your back are half mine," &mdash; "mine," and "mine."
Then they ask'd him, abusing, and calling him names,
If he chose to refund, or be duck'd in the Thames.
Not easily dash'd, Master Murphy replied,
And, with true Irish impudence, told 'em, they lied;
Hurt his good name and fame by such groundless detraction;
In the court of King's-bench, said, he'd enter his action;
Got Westminster-abbey in Westminster-hall,
He doubted not he'd be reveng'd of them all;
Here the cause coram non &mdash; But the judge stopp'd him short,
And committed the 'Squire for contempt of the court.&mdash;

Bung'd his eye with a bottle of best Burton ale,
An excellent judge of brown beer, mild or stale,
A Reverend Divine into court next came reeling,
The first of fine bards, with the females, for feeling:
Of friendship and fancy so free his effusions,
That he spouts in his drink, his poetic prolusions.
He open'd his mouth and attempted to speak,
In vain, in plain English, in Latin, in Greek;
A strange lapsus linguae in all overtook him,
The divine gift of tongues had so fairly forsook him.
At length mustering words up sufficient to mumble,
"A seat they must give him, or else &mdash; he should tumble;"
He said, he was ne'er cut so sadly before,
And was now drunk with toasting his dear Hannah More.
Apollo acknowledg'd he well knew the woman,
And therefore excus'd what might else be uncommon.
"But I," said he, "no man inspire with October,
So let Dr. Langhorne go sleep himself sober."

Another cause call'd, lo!  the noise of a carriage,
Driving hard (as if coming to mend a mad marriage
Begun at wrong end) interrupted the hearing,
And set it aside by a new interfering.
"Make way," was the cry, "for mine host of the garter"&mdash;
A fair lady's messenger might have look'd smarter:
But this, you're to know, our poetical host
At London from Bath was but just arriv'd post;
Un peu deshabille, though still in the ton&mdash;
A peer, in such cases, come en policon.

Awe-struck at Apollo's bright borrow'd mustachio's,
Although he'd be thought to be mighty courageous,
He scrap'd and he bow'd until, growing quite tedious,
He stammer'd out, "Sir &mdash; my good Sir &mdash; your obsequious&mdash;"
When luckily for him, at once he bethought him
Of what his French tutor or valet had taught him;
How a Grand Capitaine, when he wanted, at court,
His patron, the minister, Louvois' support,
Chang'd simple Monsieur to a title much greater,
Plain Sir and my Lord, for my God, my Creator!
Which flattering expedient obtain'd for him soon
A cross of St. Louis, and Marshal's baton.

So he &mdash; "My Lud God, your Lud Godship must know,
I come from Bath Easton, my wife's plenipo,
To plead with your godship the critical cause
Of the bards and the bardesses, the knights of the Vase;
An order poetic, of taste undisputed,
Which my spouse, at our house, hath some time instituted:
Of merit sans scruple, all doubt on't remov'd,
For Kenrick himself hath their verses approv'd;
A critic so rigid and sparing of praise,
That well they must win, who, with him, wear the bays:
By no means like my mild good-natur'd, tame turtle,
Who, on all hands, so freely bestows sprigs of myrtle.&mdash;
Alarm'd at your royal divine declaration,
Respecting the rank of poetical station,
They tremble, for fear wealth, distinction, and birth
Should be levell'd as low as mere genius and worth;
Confounded sans facon among the canaille,
Folks nobody knows, people born in an alley?
A newly-made Lord, for decorum a stickler,
Cheek by jowl, thus may stand by a journeyman bricklayer;
A tame English Earl by a wild Irish haymaker,
And a royal-bed duchess a-breast with her staymaker,
What a thing, if such persons to rank have the luck&mdash;
Only think! &mdash; with a Kelly, a Jones, or a Duck!
Oh!  horrid the heterogeneous mixture,
Should so ill-dispos'd be each stone-mason's fixture!
In morals 'twould be such a gross solecism
As would in religion engender a schism.
They therefore request that your godship, con gusto,
Will settle the rank of each Bath-Easton busto;
And that, in assigning their several places,
You'll reflect they have sacrificed all to the Graces."

Apollo, of course quite au fait de la langue,
Attentively listen'd to this fine harrangue;
And half in good earnest, and half in a joke,
Wav'd his hand with a grace, and as graciously spoke.

"Like you, Sir, I honour distinction and wealth&mdash;
I hope that you left your fair spouse in good health&mdash;
It is know, as a part of my musical passion,
To play to the tune of the people in fashion;
Hence I think, as you think, it highly improper
To mix gold and silver with pewter and copper;
Absurd the alloy, so, to mix men of quality
With writers of wit, sense, and genius, and jollity.
It is but expedient such elegant elves
A temple of fame should have built for themselves.
With this point in view, I've a thought in my head,
Which can't fail to please both the living and dead.

In the little quadrangle, inclos'd by the cloisters,
Where the school-boys throw sticks, stones, and odd shells of oysters,
A spot, though so sacred, so sadly neglected,
I mean that such temple should strait be erected.
The Knight, to whom cousin Macgreggor's epistle
Was written, shall draw the design, in a whistle;
And that this same structure may be quite the thing,
The outlines, when sketch'd, shall be touch'd by the king.
His royal right lines, though but trac'd o'er Dick Dalton's,
Beat all your Brook Taylor's, your Kirby's and Malton's.
Sir William's design acheve par le Roi,
A la Greque, in the Gothic, or in the Chinois,
The dome, soon run up by some Marybone builder,
Will as soon be adorn'd by the carver and gilder;
When the artist obscure, but with whom I've acquainted,
As well, if not better, than Reynolds, shall paint it;
Your friends, then, in fashion, whene'er they appear,
A bright constellation, may shine in their sphere;
Better bred than these busts, that are always at strife&mdash;
And so, Mr. Miller, my love to your wife;
For whom I professs a peculiar regard,
And will favour the most her most fav'rite bard:
But, till in this temple there's room for 'em made is,
My compliments wait on the Lords and the Ladies."&mdash;

APOLLO so gravely our Envoy address'd,
That a deeper than he might have not smok'd the jest;
O'er his features serene though there simper'd a smile,
When he thought of Lord Clare and the Earl of Carlisle;
His fancy as tickled, and highly delighted,
With dainty Lord V&mdash;, and quaint Willy Whitehead;
Resolv'd, of some people, for love, nor for money,
To class with his bards such complete macaroni.

His suit thus obtain'd, Mr. Miller departed,
And till he reach'd Bath, his poor post-horses smarted.

The noise of his driver's loud lash had scarce ceas'd,
Ere a twenty-times louder set up and increas'd;
Resembling, as near it approach'd the church-doors,
That of scolding old bawds and provoking young whores,
At Billingsgate bred, when the beadle, to cart 'em,
To bridewell takes both, out of pity to part 'em.
For a crowd, it appears, of your feminine writers,
Your novelists, play-wrights, and legend inditers,
Were come, for their dues from his godship Apollo,
And, ere they had seen him, began their view-holla.
'Mong these too the tongues you might hear very plain
Of two famous actresses from Drury-lane.
With another, who lately here bury'd her spouse,
Clapp'd as much, and as often, at t' other playhouse.
With the vergers mean-while, an old prebend kept brawling,
"'Twas a shame not to let the great Mrs. Mat&mdash;l&mdash;y in."
But this, Bishop T&mdash;m&mdash;s could not well at all brook;
"Take her back," quoth the Dean, "to your own church at W&mdash;lb&mdash;k."

A pause now ensued, for, being all out of breath,
They were hush'd for a moment, and silent as death;
When afresh beat each clack, like a pewterer's hammer,
And stunn'd the still air with vociferous clamour.
Thus at sea a dead calm oft precedes a great storm&mdash;
But to give you a simile still more in form,&mdash;

'Tis said, at a Kermes, or Dutch county fair;
Once the shouts of the populace froze in the air;
Their screams, cries, and curses, "Gods! &mdash; Donder in blixem!"
With their oaths mix'd their prayers, that go always betwixt 'em;
Of men, women, children, so horrid a gabble
Had never been heard since the building of Babel.
Like swallows at Christmas, their words, strung together,
In icicles hung, till the change of the weather;
When, suddenly, thawing, they all burst asunder,
And rush'd on the ear, like a nigh clap of thunder.

Even so the shrill tongues of our bard and actresses
Broke into the Abbey's most sacred recesses;
For a moment, awaking the half-buried dead,
Though cas'd be their lugs in thick coffins of lead,
Save the dunny old dutchesses, whom the last trompets
With their titles must tickle, or deaf like the strumpets.

With his thumbs in his ears, just like Hogarth's musician,
Phoebus begg'd, for God's sake, they might not have admission;
At least till he'd summon'd a pack'd special jury,
On whom they might vent their impatience and fury.

"The Muses," says he, "they pretend are their patrons;
Let them be impannell'd a jury of matrons:
They are not such good maids but, on such an occasion,
They'll serve, if they're press'd, by a little persuasion.
Should myself not pass sentence as each woman pleases,
Like Thracian viragoes, they'd tear me in pieces;
Of Orpheus ev'n Phoebus might meet the disaster,
The fate of the man be the fate of his master;
Not stronger the passions of my beldam sybils,
Than those of your female composers of libels;
By Jove, I sha'nt care to detect the defaulters:
Unless I go fetch father Jupiter's daughters:
Alone, I will never &mdash; Zounds!  how they keep screaming!
Attempt to do justice to so many women.""

The Busts began bowing, and begg'd him to try&mdash;
"If I do," quoth his godship, "I wish I may die."
"Consider," said he, "my dear dabblers in rhime,
One woman's enough for a man at a time;
One more, though a God &mdash; Vergers, don't let them enter&mdash;
At present 'twill suit me, by no means, to venture:
Besides it grows late, my tim-whisky's come down,
And I've some little business to do, out of town."

Entre nous, madam Thetis his godship expected,
And a mistress, you know, must be never neglected,
Unless one is tir'd of the wench, or the sport;
So he rose, sine die, adjourning the COURT.
