The glaring beams of evening sun being spent,
Each weary reaper to his cottage went;
The tuneful birds in concert all combine,
And tempt each swain in vocal notes to join.
The whistling hind incloses all his sheep,
And farmers soon compose themselves to sleep;
The ewes impatient for their lambkins bleat,
And streams of milk gush from the heifer's teat.
The suckling calves are by their dams caress'd,
And parched fields by falling dews are refresh'd;
The moon unclouded slowly mounts the air,
And twinkling stars in brightness all appear.
A youth, in mournful lays, strives to relate,
Maria's charms, and her untimely fate,
The gliding streams in silence move along,
As if inclin'd to hear the doleful song.
The wretched lover, pensive and alone,
Laments her fate, and thus conveys his moan:
Unhappy day! &mdash; why did the sun appear?
Ah luckless day!  that cost me many a tear;
Alone, at midnight, I each woe renew,
And with my tears encrease the falling dew;
My ceaseless moans awake the nodding birds,
And breezes waft them to the sleepless herds;
The listning fishes turn against the stream,
At each sad mention of Maria's name;
The moon grows wan, the stars their lustre lose,
Nor do sweet notes the swain to rest compose;
No youthful shepherd with his pipe is seen,
Nor smiling lasses haunt the shady green;
The warbling birds dejected hang their heads,
And blooming flowers wither in their beds.
Be sure, ye rocks, while I my grief disclose,
Let your sad echoes lengthen out my woes.
His yielding rod the angler has forsook,
And fishes sport no more in ev'ry brook;
The early fowler quits his morning sport,
No plowman to the upland fields resort;
The chearful huntsman now neglects his horn,
And wanton hares frequent the plains each morn;
No more beneath the shades shall fair ones throng,
With merry tale, or pipe, or pleasant song.
Why sounds the lawn with loud laments and cries?
While swoln with tears the floods and riv'lets rise.
Her charms were known to all the swains around,
With ev'ry grace the smiling fair was crown'd,
My words are wind &mdash; She's deaf to all my cries,
Alas how pale! &mdash; The lustre left her eyes;
Robb'd of their beams, in everlasting night,
And clos'd to give me woe, as once delight.
Admir'd, esteem'd, beloved, and caress'd,
With shining virtues was Maria bless'd.
This pledge of lasting love, dear shade, receive,
'Tis all, alas!  my present grief can give.
But grief, by its own force, will set me free,
And send me soon a willing ghost to thee.
Cropt in the early spring of youth, I'll go
With joyful haste, to wait thy shade below;
Where all are ever young and heav'nly fair,
Without a sigh, a sorrow, or a tear.
While stormy winds and gentle breezes glow,
While dreadful floods and winding riv'lets flow,
While warbling birds in concert on the spray,
While crowing cocks proclaim the rising day,
While light appears in stars, in sun, or moon,
'Till morn to even chang'd, and night to noon,
While sailing barks frequent the pathless main
Her name and fatal end my voice retain.
