COLIN.
The tuneful black-bird from yon fragrant thorn,
With chearful notes salutes the crimson morn;
Sweet music warbles from each vocal spray;
The sportive lambs thro' verdant meadows play;
All nature smiles, and why should Damon grieve?
Say, swain, what comfort can thy Colin give?

DAMON.
Can Damon smile, when to the distant town
Fair Dora (Damon's better half) is flown?
In vain the black-birds sing, the lambkins play,
Dull are their charms when Dora is away.
No comfort can assuage fond Damon's pain,
'Till Dora's eye revive her dying swain.

COLIN.
Ah, Damon!  how thy sorrows pierce my heart!
Glad would thy Colin kind relief impart.
For Colin too has felt the pow'r of love,
And Damon's woes must Colin's pity move.

DAMON.
Cease, gentle swain, for Damon cease to mourn!
My trembling heart forebodes she'll ne'er return:
As yester morn beneath yon spreading oak,
Her praise to sing, my oaten pipe I took,
Three drops of blood (I shudder at the tale)
Gush'd from my nose; my reed in pieces fell;
A croaking raven hover'd o'er my head,
And in my arms my fav'rite lamb dropt dead!
These dreadful omens threaten not in vain,
Ne'er, ne'er will Dora tread our fields again.

COLIN.
A hoary sage in yonder hamlet dwells,
Moeris, for wisdom fam'd, and magic spells;
His art the secrets of the sky explores;
Foretells when wrecks shall strew the sea-beat shores,
When nipping frosts await our tender corn,
When plenteous harvests shall our fields adorn,
Omens and dreams none can like him explain,
From Moeris learn what these dire omens mean.

DAMON.
But, lo!  the shepherds run; what joy appears
In ev'ry face, while mine's bedew'd with tears!
Yet, hark! &mdash; they sing &mdash; and Dora's name I hear!
How sweet the sound to longing Damon's ear!
Here, Colin, here, array'd in all her charms,
Fair Dora comes to bless my eager arms,
Lo!  where she treads, the purple vi'lets spring;
On ev'ry spray the tuneful warblers sing:
In joyous notes will Damon join their song,
To Dora's charms her Damon's strains belong.

SONG.  TUNE &mdash; YOUNG JOCKEY TO THE FAIR.
With Damon sing, ye jovial swains,
Salute the day with cheerful strains,
Which brings fair Dora to our plains,
And ends a lover's care.
How bloom the fields where Dora treads!
Kind nature all her fragrance sheds;
The feather'd choir in warb'ling lay
Hails beauteous Dora from each spray,
And sings the happy pair.

Now fonder grown, the am'rous dove
In warmer transports bills his love;
New raptures ev'ry bosom move,
While charming Dora's near.
E'en monarch's of the purpled east,
Such joys as mine can never taste;
Through all the world's wide circuit round,
No charms of mind and form are found
With Dora's to compare.
