Ye ministers!  by no example aw'd,
Britons who follow still your various crimes,
Who shun the temples of you god;
And trace the vice of former times,
From piety your empire's glory came,
From that your state arose, on that depends your fame.

Britain has oft, from impious guilt,
Felt the dread vengeance from on high,
Her sons in rage their blood have spilt,
And kindred made their kindred die;
Nor rage of civil arms alone they bore,
But the Batavian pow'r has thunder'd on the shore.

Th' Iberian, haughty in his turn,
Has with bold insults shewn his pride,
Receiv'd each threaten'd vow with scorn,
And all the British pow'r had defy'd;
While vice o'er Britain's land triumphant reigns,
And liberty's fast bound in chains.

From such a source must every woe,
Still growing greater take its rise,
And on the realm and people flow,
Who still degen'rate into vice;
Virtue and truth alone are sought by few,
But crouds, rush into vice, and courtly crimes pursue.

The ministry, who steer the helm,
Who sway the wide extended realm,
And rule the affairs of all the nation,
They with a thousand wanton cruelties,
Oppress the subjects with taxation,
Whilst they themselves roll on in luxury, and vice,
And nothing but the blood of thousands will suffice.

Ye Britons, who were once for glory fam'd
And held the world so much in awe,
No more your martial deeds shall ere be nam'd,
Your Magna Charta's, nor your law,
For thus so wantingly to spill the blood,
Or those who erst in your defence so bravely stood.

From race so vicious never came,
Those Britons of Eliza's reign,
Who, zealous for their country's fame,
Humbled the haughty pride of Spain;
Nor those who made imperious Lewis yield,
And shook the gallick throne at Blenheim's glorious field.

But manly youths of manly sires,
They strung their nerves with hardy toil,
Free from effeminate desires,
They fell'd the oak or till'd the soil:
Nor ceas'd their labours till the sunny ray
Vary'd the mountain shade, and clos'd the well spent day.

What will not length of time make worse?
Our sires less pious grew than theirs,
If we improve the vicious course,
And to new sins instruct our heirs,
Down, down the glory of our Britain goes,
And sets in vice, which first from thirst of virtue rose.
