Gently the moon dispers'd her pleasing light,
And silver'd o'er the trembling lucid wave;
Fair was the view that hail'd the wond'ring sight,
And soft the pleasure midnight silence gave.

When lo &mdash; from yonder venerable cell,
An antient Sage with pensive movement came;
Full many a year &mdash; his snowy locks cou'd tell,
And many a care &mdash; his feeble bending frame.

Along the flowing rivers peaceful shore,
Thro' sweetest shades he bent his lonely way,
And as the sigh his aged bosom tore,
The trees soft echo'd to the mournful lay.

Where the long Erne rolls tumultuous down,
And foaming mixes with the briny flood;
On the dread shelve, whose ivy mantled crown
O'erhangs the pool, the hoary hermit stood.

Silent he paus'd, then raising both his hands,
Oh sweetest Erne, loveliest stream, he said,
Once knew thy hallow'd banks, no rude commands,
No busy cares approach'd the peaceful shade.

When from the rosy portals of the morn,
The day advancing o'er the dewy fields,
Awak'd the Swain, to sound his well-known horn,
And taste the fragrance blooming nature yields.

When rob'd in native grace, the smiling fair,
Fresh as a rose, came blushing o'er the hill;
Her breast unruffled by each anxious care,
Save those true friendship and fond love instil.

Love then was simple, Nature's sweetest call,
Nor sought allurements from delusive art,
Nor vague refinement robb'd it of its all,
Each shepherd knew, and hail'd the pleasing smart.

When thro' the flow'ry mead, with garlands crown'd,
To softest music and sweet vocal lays;
The youngsters danc'd in graceful movements round,
Or undissembling tun'd their Maker's praise.

O blissful days, when filial rev'rence hail'd
The silver'd honours of the pious sage;
While he, his moral tales with joy reveal'd,
And sought each rising passion to assuage.

The fertile plains content and plenty shar'd,
With them mild peace, serenely smiling came;
But if dread war, her purple banners rear'd,
Each martial shepherd felt a hero's flame.

Few were the wants, each placid bosom knew,
Few were the cares those simple wants requir'd;
With rising years, a love of virtue grew,
And Nature pleas'd, no luxury desir'd.

But Oh, sweet Erne!  how fled these golden days?
How fled the joys, those aged eyes have seen;
No longer tunes the bard, his useful lays,
Nor rural music echo's thro' the green.

No silent footsteps press thy mossy side,
Thy limpid stream unheeded flows along;
No chearful Sylvans thro' the forest glide,
The grove unenvy'd, hails the warbler's song.

Yon antient town whose side thy current laves,
When vice once fled, and ev'ry cank'ring care;
Its fond remembrance from the hermit craves,
The sigh of anguish, and the melting tear.

Its peaceful roofs once humble neatness fram'd,
And Nature knew no want unknown before;
Till baneful luxury's dread colours stream'd,
And banish'd innocence the hostile shore.

Since then unnumber'd vices pour amain,
And spread their poison o'er the tainted land;
Wild dissipation with her venal train,
And pride and jealousy go hand in hand.

Now smiling vice fair virtue's semblance steals,
To rob sweet innocence of ev'ry charm;
Now sophistry unerring reason veils,
And gilds the deed replete with baleful harm.

Oh sweetest Erne!  loveliest stream that flows,
Quick from these shores your christal currents roll;
For here sincerity no longer grows,
And balmy friendship from each breast has stole.

Witness yon bow'r, with fragrant woodbine made,
Witness yon shade, that hangs around the bow'r;
Witness yon moon, that silvers o'er the shade,
How long I strove against the fatal hour.

But vain the labours of the hoary sage,
Vain his pale cheek, the falling tear bedews;
Each tainted bosom had the vicious rage,
And thro' the medium of corruption views.

Oh gracious pow'rs!  that guide yon sparkling orbs,
Mark the strong passions, heave my struggling soul;
Mark how dread grief, my rend'ring heart absorbs,
And prompts the deed, less reeling, would control.

Here ceas'd the bard, and from the jutting cliff,
Fearless he plung'd into the wat'ry flood;
While round the moon, to veil her friendly grief,
A sable vapour for a moment stood.
