THIRSIS.
Begin, my Daphnis, while the sultry day
Glows on our fields, begin thy pleasing lay.
The panting flocks in yonder shade recline,
And o'er our heads the beachen branches twine;
The falling riv'let keeps a murm'ring din;
Thy pleasing lay, my Daphnis, now begin.

DAPHNIS.
Then tell me, swain, what song you chuse to hear,
The Chevy-chace, or Maudlin's rural cheer.
I sung with charming glee the other day
In Myron's grove, the Freer of Orders Gray.
But if some other rhyme delight thee more,
Name what thou wilt, for I've enow in store.

THIRSIS.
Poor Colin's love shall echo through the glade,
While yon stout mowers slumber in the shade;
The glowing meads employ the rural throng,
But Colin's loves demand the shepherd's song.

DAPHNIS.
O Sylvia!  must an object so divine,
For ever pain this love sick heart of mine?
Will nothing move thee, nothing gain thine ear,
Till Colin's death will prove his love sincere?
What tho' the rural prospect smile around,
(The woods, the hills, the vales with pleasure crown'd)
Tho' youthful nature charm the peaceful sight,
Your lonely Colin meets with no delight.
Now happy Cloddy saunters o'er the fields,
Visits each flow'r that balmy April yields;
Collects their sweetness in his am'rous lays,
And charms the grove with Amaryllis' praise,
Once could thy Colin tune a bolder strain;
Now pines the wood forsaken as a swain.
No longer sounds my rebec thro' the grove,
For what can please without the maid we love.

Return my fair! &mdash; among the dimpling streams
Darkling we'll stray, while summer's harmless beams
Aloft, among the quiv'ring alders play,
Nor wound those eyes, more pow'rful far than they.
I've trimm'd my woodbine bow'r, the trembling shades
Extend, and various flow'rets deck the glades:
The swans along the silver lakes appear&mdash;
Sure none but Sylvia's self should wander here.

Come, gentle Zephyrs, breathe refreshing gales,
And yield a fairer prospect &mdash; vernal vales.
Let the gay lambkins dance along the plain,
And sing, ye birds, to bring my love again.
O!  hapless Colin!  thou art left to mourn,
Thy love is gone, and will no more return.

Ye level plains, ye bleating hills, farewell!
No more in you the loves and graces dwell;
No heav'nly transports haunt the silent shades;
The lively verdure of the bow'r fades;
My downy sheep no more I tend with glee,
For what has pleasure, when forsook by thee?

In tender youth, we stray'd along the green,
Then on her Colin, Sylvia smil'd serene;
I wove a wreath of balmy flow'rs for you,
(Those cheeks direct me to their loveliest hue!)
How sweet you look'd!  I felt my bosom move
With dear delight, nor knew the kindling love.

Again the pleasing task for you I try,
The roses wither, and the lillies die.
The violets and carnations fade away,
Thus Colin's hope, and Sylvia's love decay.
Pan god of swains, and great Apollo's pow'r,
The sylvan Oreads from their lofty bow'r;
And green Sylvanus, with his flow'ry reed,
Frequent the plains where once my lambs did feed,
All ask me whence these silent flames arise,
"Love heeds not, Colin, thy despairing sighs;
See Delia's cheek far brighter roses yields,
And richer lambs are fed in Delia's fields.
Thy hopeless love 'tis folly to repine,
If Sylvia's gone, a fairer nymph be thine."
They talk of love who never knew my flame,
For who has beauty but my lovely dame?

O!  cruel Sylvia  whither dost thou stray,
What wand'ring fancy leads thee far away?
What madness tempts thy lovely eyes to gain
Jamaica's strand, and dare the raging main?
Who can protect thee on that fatal shore,
Where earthquakes plunge, and hostile cannons roar?

Whom dost thou fly? &mdash; my flocks, my life is thine,
And canst thou find a warmer soul than mine?
But ah!  she's gone &mdash; ye furious waves forbear,
Ye winds and tempest, weigh a lover's prayer!
Spare, Phoebus, spare! &mdash; forgive thy shepherd's pain,
Thy angry blaze, that form will ne'er sustain!

My plaintive notes detain thy falling stream,
The weeping Naiads listen to my theme:
The widow dove is silent in the tree,
And every warbler quits his note for me;
Deep melancholy shadows all the grove,
Stern oaks relent, but Sylvia does not love.

Before mine eyes a dizzy darkness swims,
A chilly shiv'ring seizes on my limbs;
My bosom achs beneath the piercing woe,
My head will break &mdash; Is this what love will do?
In vain the woods, O swain!  resound thy moan,
Thy love is gone, for ever, ever gone!

Yet Damon promis'd soon to bring her back,
Ah!  now my boding heart 'tis time to break!
Well might he brave the horrors of the deep,
This was the dream that murder'd me in sleep.
'Twas thus &mdash; he tir'd me thro' the desert wood&mdash;
Tore out my heart, and roll'd me in my blood.

A thousand arts to please the fair he knew;
Neat was his farm, but &mdash; could he love so true?
Could he all night to guard her hamlet wake,
And count his life a trifle for her sake?
But did not he defy the rushing wind,
And furious waves, when Colin stood behind?
Who shall befriend me, whither shall I fly?
The swain that dares to love, must dare to die.

O hapless swain!  thy flocks neglected stray,
The base Menalcas bears thy lambs away.
Rough thorns and thistles choak thy fruitful land,
Thy thirsty gardens too, some care demand:
From flocks, and fields, and gardens, Colin flies,
And to neglected love, a victim dies.

Yet tow'ring rocks, preserve my doleful lay,
Much time in fruitless plaint I've thrown away.
Ye watry pow'rs!  that rule the boist'rous main,
Attend, propitious to a wretched swain:
This voted lover to your deeps I give,
Still the rude waves, and oh!  let Sylvia live.
These numbers on the rocks he did engrave,
And plung'd at once into the dashing wave.

THIRSIS.
Oh!  hapless swain!  but who could fate withstand,
When cruel love had once the upper hand?
Away to Micon's hamlet let us hie,
For gloomy clouds are gathering in the sky;
Thro' the dark air the scowling winds are borne,
And the blue lightning blasts the promis'd corn;
Between the rocks the meeting whirlwinds rage,
And fronting thunders o'er our heads engage.
But what's their fury, to the snares of love?
One gentle gale will all their rage remove;
He comes, with all the meekness of a dove,
And ever in the careless shepherds way,
He tries his artless notes and wanton play;
Then sudden, in a horrid monster flies,
Fate in his breath, and madness in his eyes.
From Etna's trembling brow the fury came,
Where virgin snows beguile the lurking flame.
