When Poets, wrapt in Fancy's dream,
Chuse Fable their instructive theme,
It matters little if the Moral
Perchance come after, or before all.

One thing appears to ev'ry eye,
"We all are equal when we die;"
The King, the Beggar, Prince, and Poet,
Daily departing, clearly shew it;
And use an equal grave and coffin,
To put the case their soul left off, in.

Why then is pride alone to shew
The difference 'twixt high and low?
Since when Death pleases to o'ertake us;
Distinctions all at once forsake us;
He lays us, in an instant, level
With those we once wish'd at the Devil.

The Fable shews (with all due deference)
The folly of that silly preference
That Vanity too often arrogates,
When taking seats, or passing narrow gates;
Thinking, to keep poor friends at distance
With pride, essential to existence.

The Fable will prolong the time,
So truce to moralizing rhyme.

A man whose chief amusement lay
In contemplating works of clay;
Who, mindful of his native dust,
To canvas'd head, prefer'd a bust;
Had of them form'd a large museum,
For all who chose to come and see 'em.
With which, in semicircle placed,
He thought his room superbly graced.
And all must own that thus to do it, he
Display'd a proper perspicuity.

Waller and Goldsmith led the way,
Then Drummond, Addison, and Gay;
Next were Sommerville and Dyer,
Then Shenstone, Swift, and Matthew Prior;
Then came Lord Lyttleton and Rowe,
Garth, Watts, Cervantes, and De Foe.
Pope, Smollet, Fielding, Marmontel,
Then Shakspeare, Lansdowne, and Morel;
Some stood on shelves, and brackets some on,
Then follow'd Dryden, and Roscommon.
Then Chaucer, Falconer, and Blair,
With Doctor Johnson and Voltaire;
Then stood extended rather wide,
Young, Mallet, Sprat, and Akenside;
And, like a sword without a hilt on,
Stood elevated "poor blind Milton."
Then came a group, whose names to mention,
Would needlessly command attention;
Being inferior to the rest,
Excepting Whitehead, Hughes, and West;
And Spencer, Chatterton, and Broome,
With Wyat, nearly fill'd the room;
Leaving a space for Denham, Green,
And Surrey; Busts which clos'd the scene.

These Busts (as many may remark)
Were not, like those within the ark,
Placed, two by two, of equal worth,
In order as they graced the earth;
But carelessly, as fancy taught him,
Or as their pleasing features caught him.
This was productive of a riot,
Which first began 'twixt Gay and Wyat,
And thence diffus'd it's envious poison,
Quickly from center to horizon.
Said Wyat, "Can I bear to see
Bards of antiquity like me,
Insulted in so gross a way?
Sprat, Smollet, Sommerville, and Gay,
Fellows, scarce fit to form a chorus,
Are placed in dignity before us.
Fie Chaucer, why thus silent stand?
'Tis justice tells you to command
A place more suited to your merit,
Have you no energy, or spirit?"

Says Toby Smollet, with an oath,
"You seem to have enough for both."
"Why who are you, my friend," said Gay,
"To give yourself these airs, I pray?
What merits can you have to boast?
Except for 'Smut, the farrier's ghost.'
A worthy part, what think you, Smollet?
He would have shone, in 'What d'ye call it?'"

Sprat would have spoke, but Sommerville
Beg'd as a favor he'd be still;
And leave the cause to abler parties,
With whom abuse a famous art it.

Old Chaucer, rous'd at the appealing
Of Wyat, to his warmth of feeling,
Mumbled abhorrence mixt with wonder,
That ancient worth was so kept under.
"Shame!  shame!" he cried, (and shook his clay beard)
"That youth can bear to see a grey-beard
Treated with such unkind neglect,
And still shew marks of disrespect!
Why sits Mat Prior at his ease,
Above such 'hoary locks' as these?
Why is De Foe exalted too?"

"Friend Geoffry, pray what's that to you?"
Mat quick replied, "And tell me why
It matters whether your or I
Stand first or last?  think you 'twould move me
Which of you two should stand above me?
What diff'rence now (strife I abhor, Sir,)
'Twixt Dunstan Geoff, and Geoffry Chaucer?"

De Foe now feels his anger rise,
And to old Geoff's demand replies;
"What matters pray, my exaltation;
Is it for you to fix my station?
In what consists your mighty skill
That you should place us all at will?
Are men of worth to wear the fetters
Of one, whose many useless letters
Render'd his writings past comparing
With those whose merits he'd be sharing?
Believe 'tis truth, when I aver
That positively I prefer,
(Perhaps you'll wonder why I do so:)
To your old tales, my Robin Crusoe."

"You may prefer them; true," said Spencer;
"You may decry the tales, what then, Sir?
You would prefer perhaps to weed 'em,
For why?  you have not wit to read 'em.
Fie, Denham, Dryden, what!  in silence
Hear what would move me half a mile hence!"
This rous'd them both.  From all parts flow
Loud anger upon poor De Foe.

Blair saw, (unless affairs were mended,)
The discord never would be ended;
So humbly beg'd the aid of Swift,
To give his arguments a lift.

Swift having first applied to Pope,
Thought he might give his wit full scope.
"And why," said he, "should you suppose,
From Chaucer's lips if nonsense flows,
Yours should succeed?  when e'en his failing,
Was the deserv'd reward for railing;
Why all this noise, this rout, this pother,
Cause one fool's pleading for another?"

"Fool, Sir!" said Shakspeare, "let me teach you
Politer manners, I beseech you;
Spencer a fool you cannot mean,
As witnesseth is Fairy Queen:
Now if you spoke of Pope or Young,
There would be license for your tongue;
Or if that he had spoke of you Sir,
He would have been a just accuser."

"Me!" exclaim'd Pope, "you saucy knave!
Know ye whose fury 'tis you brave?
O that I could but wield a pen,
To scourge that most unjust of men;
No man could I select more fit,
To be the victim of my wit.
A fool!  you muckworm!  No &mdash; by G&mdash; d'ye see,
There's none can parallel my Odyssey."

"Your Odyssey," said Marmontel,
Altho' they reckon it so well;
I own were I the arbitrator,
Your essays, epigrams, and satire,
I should be tempted to confess,
A useless and ill-natured mess."

"Blockhead!" cries Young, "your addle head
Shews that your brains have long been dead;
Else you would ne'er presume to vie,
With writers of celebrity.
The accents from thy vacant sconce,
Proclaim thee what thou art, a dunce."

Fielding now spoke in loud retort,
By Young's unbounded censure hurt;
(He thought he now could do no less
Than help a brother in distress.)

"Insipid creature!  dull accuser!
Why all these airs?  who spoke to you, Sir?
In vain, poor simpleton, you try
That author's merit to decry;
How willingly would I agree
That man should my instructor be.
O that he'd my sense, and that I had his!
My works fall short of Alcibiades!
Then might all bards that ever sung,
Down to oblivion follow Young;
In vain on earth to bear the bell he meant
Darkness, all know, is Edward's element."

Goldsmith and Shenstone now produce
A thund'ring torrent of abuse;
Against the man who dared defame
Their fav'rite Young's exalted name.

Now Watts, and Dyer, Hughes, and West,
Spoke pro and con, as each thought best;
And join'd by Garth, and Broome, and Green,
(No one can find out what they mean;)
Each quoting in his turn, a stanza
To aid this queer extravaganza.

Milton declar'd he would be heard,
Morel wish'd to put in a word,
But all in vain, for Akenside,
Tax'd him and Lyttelton with pride
In not beginning long before,
And now they should not speak, he swore.

"Had I but arms," said Rowe, "an hour,
And Akenside was in my power,
If his thick pate was not too hard,
The rogue's opinion should be marr'd:
He's past endurance, vain, fantastic,
And merits the reward of a stick."

Quoth Surrey, "Pray, who is't so pat,
Can tell who merits this or that?
Surely the speaker should partake,
The scourge he would for others make;
And bid the power rest with Surrey,
He'd do his bus'ness in a hurry."

"For why, Sir," quick replied Voltaire,
"I see no reason, I declare;
For anger he had good authority,
Considering the great majority
Milton and Shakspeare would have gain'd,
As they in former times obtain'd.
Whene'er they sang, all ear and eye lent;
I wonder what could keep them silent."

"Heavens!" said Lansdowne, "who can bear
To hear a scurvy Frenchman there,
Reprove the monarchs (of their time)
Of Stage and Poetry sublime?
In this assembly they should claim
The tributes of exalted fame,
Thrones of bright crystal should contain
Such treasures, while they here remain."

"Hey day!" amaz'd, exclaim'd Cervantes,
"Leave these pomposo's and andantes;
My worthy friend, pray moderato,
Such praise I don't know what to say to."

"Suppose," says Chatterton, "you don't,
If you'll be such a fool, I won't;
What man but you would frankly own,
Shakspeare deserves a crystal throne?
And Milton by his side would view
With scorn such vulgar dogs as you."

"Who's that," says Waller, "dare to chatter?
He cannot sure know what's the matter.
Milton would view my friend, he cries!
How could he view without his eyes?"

"Why there," said Drummond, "you are right,
No man can see without his sight;
But minus eyes, I'll take my oath,
He beats e'en you who have them both."

Addison now prepar'd to say
Something to end the mighty fray,
"For Falconer," said he, "will join
His efforts, I am sure, with mine."
When lo!  an accident occur'd,
Which settled all without a word.

It should be known to all men, that
The master was a Democrat;
And on the night of this disputing,
A mob came rioting and hooting,
In honor of a vict'ry famous;
(Pity their loyalty should shame us!)
And halloo'd for his candles loudly;
When answering perhaps too proudly,
They snatch'd up sticks, and stones, and cinders,
And sent a volley through the windows.

Now the assembly still in anger,
Sat muttering abusive clangor,
When lo!  a stone assail'd the light head,
(Ill-manner'd stone!) of luckless Whitehead;
Crack'd in a hundred scatter'd pieces,
Their anger for a moment ceases;
When strait a brick encounter'd Sprat,
And laid him with poor Whitehead, flat.

Loud exclamations now begin,
While loudly sounds the rattling din;
And ere Morel had time to wonder,
Swift came a storm, as loud as thunder,
And on his brittle pate alighted,
Which in a moment left him quite dead.
Quick flew the pieces every way,
And many felt their potent sway;
A cheek from Shenstone, nose from Dyer,
And half the face of Matthew Prior,
Torn from their native situation,
Defy the power of lamentation.

Vain was their wonder, vain complaining,
The storm continued still to rain in;
And something, (harder sure than swans-down,)
Crack'd the poor skulls of Swift and Lansdown;
Which flying round the room like shots,
Prov'd death to Somerville and Watts.

Loudly did many still exclaim,
When show'ring with such fury came
A volley through the windows yielding,
That down dropt Akenside and Fielding.
Nay many more were laid down quiet,
Among them Lyttelton and Wyat;
And Chaucer, Waller, Denham, Young,
Were each oblig'd to hold his tongue.

At last the prop that some had built on,
(The Prince of Poets) down dropt Milton;
And whether grief for his sad fate,
Or a wide crack across the pate,
Was the true cause, I cannot tell;
But Chatterton that moment fell.
From the same cause, I'm bold to say,
Fell Dryden, Addison, and Gay;
And could they have escap'd the blow,
They'd ne'er had stun'd both Broome and Rowe.

Some little pause awaken'd hope
In Surrey, Marmontel, and Pope;
The show'rs of horror now were o'er;
But short their bliss!  for on the floor
Their pates were strew'd; none could avoid it,
And Spencer secretly enjoy'd it.
But ah!  his triumph who could share?
A brick now knock'd down him and Blair;
And striking Goldsmith on the breast,
First finish'd him, and after West.
Voltaire perceiv'd the execution,
And sat in dread of dissolution;
But soon quite hush'd were all his fears,
For Garth in scraps assail'd his ears;
Crack'd by annihilating blow,
Which settled him, and poor De Foe.
Cervantes sat in silent dread,
Knowing the softness of his head;
And Smollet knew he'd keep him company,
If they continued still to thump any.

So it fell out, for Johnson's laughter,
The prelude was to what came after;
All three were taken in a moment,
And fell at once, as if't were so meant.

The company so much decreas'd,
Drummond now thought they would have ceas'd,
But no!  the mob not easy tir'd,
With rage still unabated, fired;
And crack'd both his, and Mallet's caput,
For nought to shield themselves could they put;
And now poor Hughes, who stood between
Roscommon and deserted Green,
Would fain have been excused attending,
Forboding his untimely ending;
But all in vain, three stones at once
Alighted on his brittle sconce,
And flew apart; Roscommon halloo'd,
Shakspeare and Green directly follow'd,
Closing the slaughter of the day.

When thus a voice was heard to say;
(For Seneca from his retreat
Safe lodg'd upon the window-seat,
Who had observ'd the mighty fray,
Had heard and seen, but fear'd to say;
'Till seeing all together laying,
Sick of the rout they'd been displaying;
Thought it his duty to remind 'em
What characters they left behind 'em.)
"Hear and attend!  ye scatter'd fragments!
Squares, circles, radii, angles, segments!
Spend your last moments in repentance,
For just is fate, in this her sentence.
Nay, I'll maintain that ev'ry Bust is
Now treated in the extreme of justice:
Ye quarrel'd tho' no cause appear'd,
Nor thought of death, nor danger fear'd;
Now ye perceive, poor fools, too late,
Superior was your former state;
Why would you each precedence claim?
Pretention must have been the same;
For spite of primitive cabal, you
Are now all fools of equal value."
