"Let not your sapience mock his youthful toil,
His homely thoughts, and manner somewhat queer;
Nor critics count, with a disdainful smile,
His sighs and groans for murder'd Chanticleer."

The friendly sun hath quench'd his morning fire,
And seems inclin'd to hear a wretch complain:
Come, Elegy!  awake thy whimpering lyre,
Whilst sorrowing skies bedew my cabin's pane.

Hark!  how the pigs discordant squeakings raise!
How loud the gaggling geese demand their corn!
How goats, sheep, turkies, ducks, unite their lays,
And with their wonted concert hail the morn!

No more is heard, above these hungry cries,
My watchful centinel's shrill voice so clear;
Ah me!  no more those sounding notes shall rise,
Which yesterday so pleas'd my waking ear!

When blustering gales warr'd with the swelling deep,
And with wild howlings urg'd the ship along;
How gladly, starting from unquiet sleep,
I heard the tranquil tune thy midnight song!

Oft have I strok'd thy circling plumage gay,
Thy coral-crested head, thy pinions proud;
Oft smiling seen thee strut in sunny ray;
Oft heard thee woo thy loves, with cluckings loud.

But now to Memory's view what scenes arise!&mdash;
Lo!  how he flutters on his billowy grave!&mdash;
Still, still he floats! &mdash; th' unpitying vessel flies!&mdash;
Alas!  he sinks beneath yon dashing wave!&mdash;

Ah!  Fox!  Too long believ'd of temper mild,
What daemon urg'd thee to so dire a deed?
Sure some wolf suckled thee in caverns wild;
Ne'er was such phrenzy noted in thy breed.

Go, meek-eyed murderer!  bring me back my bird!
No more for bones, fell ruffian, fawn on me:
No more I greet thee with a softer word,
Since these fond eyes must ne'er their favourite see.

Stern Boreas!  hadst thou not thus ocean plied,
Nor thou, dread Neptune!  with such fury rav'd;
Swift had the ready boat shot o'er the tide,
And eager tars my floating minion sav'd.

Oh!  had the Fates but heard the fervent pray'r,
That fondness offer'd for his guiltless life;
How had he crow'd in Albion many a year,
Secure from Shrove-tide spurs, and luxury's knife!

But what avail my plainings and my sighs?
Will they restore his heart its vital spring,
Relume the fire that darted from his eyes,
And make him clap again the joyous wing?

What tho' his corse, by winds and waters twirl'd,
Feed some vast shark, or ravenous dolphin cloy;
His spirit now hath reach'd that happier world,
Where no storms madden, and no curs annoy.
