SCENE, A PLAIN NEAR DUNKIRK.
THYRSIS.
Say, Strephon, why your fleecy care you drove
From yon green pasture to this gloomy grove;
Say, why dismay'd and render'd pale by fright,
Your trembling limbs betook themselves to flight.
Soon as Aurora rose, these goats I led,
To brouze, when distant far I saw you fled.

STREPHON.
Oh!  Thyrsis, fly, for wolves are prowling near,
I tremble!  for to me this flock is dear.
At every blast that whistles through the shade
Of these green oaks, I think th' attack is made.
Do not mistake, not real wolves I dread,
But men by hellish brutal fury led,
Who spilt their monarch's blood, and now do stain,
Their once green fields with men and brothers slain.
The savage dogs, who still their queen confine,
A victim sure to grace Alecto's shrine;
Whose flinty hearts delight in scenes of rage,
Whose thirst alone can human blood assuage.
Their trumpets and their murdering cannons drown'd
The bleating of our lambs, a rural sound,
Through shady groves, o'er plains their bullets fly,
Defenceless we to death exposed must lie.
Our woods and fields resound with shouts of war,
Bellona rides in her triumphal car.
Oh!  may great Cobourg crush the rebel's reign,
And Louis sport triumphant o'er the plain!
Our flocks will then rejoice, the woods will ring,
All nature will in grateful accents sing.

THYRSIS.
You say what's true.  Both hills and vallies round
With plaintive sighs of shepherds now resound,
Some weeping o'er their tender lambs just slain,
Not knowing whence the random bullets came.
Others lamenting their whole substance seiz'd,
Poor helpless shepherds of their flocks are eas'd.

STREPHON.
Only for these, my tender charge, I'd go
And act against the rebels as a foe,
In case Dunkirk surrenders, then we may
Look forward and expect a cheerful day,
When peace with garlands crown'd shall reign in France,
And plenty cast on us a smiling glance.

THYRSIS.
O Strephon, dream not that; I heard to-day
The French have forc'd the armies to give way,
As I was sitting on my mossy seat,
A peasant told me of the entire defeat.
The battle's noise it was which caus'd your fright,
And made you trembling take to sudden flight.

STREPHON.
All nature grieves.  The once abundant field,
Its golden crop of Ceres does not yield,
The country round lies waste, green fields are rare,
Neglected orchards fruit no longer bear.
In lonely groves the birds are seen in throngs,
Who pensive shew their grief in mournful songs;
Of wicked men grown tir'd, at last they fly
To seek for freedom in their native sky.
Was I as free as they, I'd straight depart,
Now wretched France I'd quit with all my heart.

THYRSIS.
We swains in former times cou'd sing and dance
In safety; all things smil'd then throughout France;
The rich abundant fields, without much pains,
Brought forth their crops.  The birds in joyful strains
Warbled in every bush.  Young bleating lambs
Skipp'd o'er the tender grass, fled from their dams.
Where once rich fields and clust'ring grapes did grow,
The farmer, now a soldier, cannot sow.

STREPHON.
Oft did the raven from yon branching oak,
If we could understand what then he spoke,
Predict these scenes of woe.  Unlucky we
Impending evils could not then foresee.
By hideous screams the owls foretold our fate,
Alas!  our wretched doom we see too late.

THYRSIS.
Do not despair; the time I hope will be,
When Louis seated on the throne we'll see,
Dispensing justice and good wholesome laws,
Receiving from his subjects just applause:
Though human arms fail, God will pursue
The wretches with a vengeance long time due.

STREPHON.
O Thyrsis!  then both woods and groves will sing
The praises of our great celestial king.
The fields will then revive, rich harvests grow,
All nature will its grateful tribute shew.

THYRSIS.
A strange report does strongly indicate,
That Louis is decreed to reign by fate.
It is reported that twelve raves sought,
Disputing with each other what they sought;
A snow white pidgeon was the fatal prize,
Which caus'd this civil war at first to rise;
An eagle rushes down and ends the fight,
The ravens are obliged to take to flight.
The joyful pidgeon thus set free, does fly,
And joins his old companions of the sky.
From thence, 'tis said, three times the eagle flew
High o'er the royal prison full in view,
Holding an olive branch, and perch'd at length,
His wings three times he clapp'd with all his strength.

STREPHON.
That omens well, I hope it may be so,
What is to happen feeble men can't know.

THYRSIS.
The day is drawing to a final close,
'Tis time for us fatigu'd to take repose;
No longer, Strephon, can I with you stay,
My eyelids close through sleep, I must away.

STREPHON.
Stay here this night, my friend, come, in my cot
I have for you some good refreshment got;
I've bread and cheese, as good as you cou'd taste,
With new-laid eggs.  Pray, is not that a feast?
The pots now boil, the smoke now hides the ground;
'Tis supper time through all the country round.
