Away flew Puck and Will, to seek the shaft,
Where Cramp was laid.  A fine mercurial rod
The fairy weaves; and strait with tiny craft
Discovers of the fiend the dark abode.
There murky silence marks the exhausted lode
Of copper, that in many a ruddy streak,
Had once amid the gloomy fissures glow'd;
There silver-gray, cobaltic branches break,
And dash the deep below, a vitriolic lake.

There, on the backs of swallows that had clung
In deadly torpor, shrivell'd up he lies;
When, by the hazel touch'd, the pigmy sprung
Into a monster of enormous size.
Then shrunk into himself in agonies!
Now, as all muscle, he appear'd to strain
His limbs, and look'd as if his bursting eyes
Within their sockets he could scarce contain,
Now hiccup'd hoarse, and laugh'd, and hiccup'd hoarse again.

Next, in a blue slate cavern, Puck and Will
Found Nightmare, who up prick'd each shagged ear,
And with her rattling hoofs bade Echo fill
Her dungeon, as she view'd the fay draw near:&mdash;
And hail'd the fiery Fatuus, her compeer&mdash;
In merry mischief, sad indeed to some!
"Say," cries the goblin (with a satyr's leer),
Good cousin Puck and Wisp, say whence you come!
Certes!  to press the maids Mab orders out my bum!"

Soon as the oaf could comprehend the affair,
She stretch'd her limbs; when outflew many a bat
That slept between her leathern breasts, and there
Oft drew her paps, like any human brat,
Or fann'd her, on her hairy buttock squat:&mdash;
Spreading their skinny pinions of tann'd hue:
Then, ruminating as the monster sat,
She would collect her cavern's dripping dew,
Mix'd with the juice distill'd from cypress and from yew.

Now, as high business summon'd her abroad,
She with those dark ingredients quickly whips
The froth up from a sickly-swelling toad,
And adds the pois'nous humour that oft drips
In madness from a gasping beagle's lips,
And mixes all in a green oister-shell;
Then in the venom shakes her mane, and dips
Her hoof; ere long to issue from her cell,
Performing wonderous feats, which soon my muse shall tell.
