Hence base and brazen cheat; from garret vile,
Or murky cellar sprung; thy spurious birth
And mixed embrace, that palid hue proclaims
Thy native place was Birmingham,
A pedlar Jew thy first proprietor,
His for a tenth of thy extrinsic worth,
To think, 'mongst coin at mint in tower
Stamp'd,
By that dissembling face, and antient date,
Though cast no six months since,
To pass unknown and gull me; credulous
I mark'd thee among thy betters; and with eye
Distinguishing, arrested the foul cheat,
To dare confront the envy'd worth thou ap'st,
Confess'd to open day; come forth to view,
Nought shall avail that name, or phiz assum'd,
Or regal head of George, with laurel wreath'd,
Thy tell-tale paleness speaks thee plain
A tinker;
And honest farthings thy superiors, scorn
To lie in till or pocket that contains thee;
Oft on thy bastard race have curses fallen,
Of maids, when jilted of their evening tea,
And crying school-boys balk'd at apple-stalls,
Condemn'd henceforth to play at chuck,
And face the pegs of ruthless castle-tops,
'Till Sunday sends thee smuggl'd into poor-box.
Yet lives that beggar'd wretch, with hunger pinch'd,
Would take thee profer'd; thou art known so well,
The honest tradesman will not sell thee wares,
The simple clown, alas!  too late has found,
He took a sharper when he harbour'd thee.

Full well thou'rt known at ev'ry corner stand,
From bridge to post-office,
Newsmen and shoe-boys hate thee;
Nor would the veriest wretch a black eye risk,
Or bloody nose induce to call you his.
Where's he would throw with thee at pitch and toss,
Or jocund curl thee on greasy sack,
While Bridewell waits the hardy cheat,
That dares to tender thee for snuff or whiskey.
Nay, thee sly Kitty vainly strives to truck,
For ditties with the ballad-singer,
When all your tribe a ready market find;
Nor think by night to bilk the love-sick fair,
She wary eyes thee near some friendly lamp,
And instant loaths the purchas'd kiss,
And calls the watch on boisterous lovers.

I know thou hopest some alchymistic Jew,
Has mark'd thy meagre shape, and surface smooth,
And means by help of quick-silver appli'd,
To raise thee to the rank of envy'd shillings;
By use degraded to thy native worth,
Expect the fate of jack-daw arrogant,
Detested in a borrow'd dress,
Contempt and insult from your old companions.

No more then hope to thrive by duping innocents,
I'll lodge thee safe; in durance vile,
I'll nail thee to counter ignominious,
Where many a sixpence and a shilling shone,
'Till dearth of change, in these hard times,
Restor'd them to my customers and liberty.

Thus for a harvest by deceit and trick,
The village jugler thrives; till from success
He grows incautious; nor to wheedling maids,
By promis'd sweet-hearts, he his art confines;
But oh!  ill-fated hour, attempts to trick
Your knowing townsman, they in fraud well vers'd,
Straight take his greasy galligaskins down,
And nettles smart inflict; or oh!  far worse,
In neighbouring horse-pond flung,
He curses fortune, and atones his crimes.
