With mournful visage, and dejected air,
Sipping a simple glass of Capillaire,
Cursing his fate, and twirling round his hat,
In Arthur's vacant window REYNARD sat;
The rattling dice no more the Youth regards,
And looks indignant on surrounding cards:
His own misfortunes all his soul employ,
And dash each rising hope, each rising joy.&mdash;
Forth from his soul at length his sorrow breaks,
And in these words, or words like these, he speaks:

"Ah me!  what madness, what resistless rage,
Induc'd me first in gambling to engage?
What mighty pleasures, or what joys enhance
The banks of Pharo, or the game of Quinze?
What secret charms, and hidden magic lie
Conceal'd within the compass of a die,
That cou'd seduce me from the nobler plan,
Or in the Gambler make me sink the man?
When 'midst the youthful train the jocund throng,
Whom CARLISLE taught the energy of song,
Through fair ETONA'S verdant meads I stray'd,
And woo'd the tuneful Nine my strains to aid,
No pangs I felt, no sorrows then I knew,
Of care devoid the conscious moments flew;
My soul, on Virtue fix'd, ne'er burnt for gain,
Or knew the fatal sound of 'Seven's the main:'
Then by my folly never doom'd to want,
Unknowing then 'Annuities to grant.'
O cou'd I, like my gentle Brother STE,
Indulge myself in calm Stupidity!
Oblivion o'er his many losses creeps,
And lo, in yonder corner where he sleeps!&mdash;
Shall I to Palace-Yard to make new laws,
And roar a Patriot for my Country's cause?
Or shall I to the levee of his Grace,
And bow, obedient, to regain my place?
Or shall I to the City, there to try
If Mordecai will grant me more supply?
Grant me, ye pitying Jews!  one more supply,
Again the Dice shall shake, the Cards shall fly!
Next week Newmarket Meeting does begin,
Pyrrhus and Pumpkin there are sure to win!
Grant then, ye pitying Jews!  one more supply,
And STE shall wake to join security."

He said &mdash; and straitway wak'd the snoring STE.&mdash;
Th' Illustrious Brothers mount his vis-a-vis;
Unbid, to Jonathan's the coachman drives,
To treat with Mordecai, and "do" their lives;
Whirl thro' the Strand their generous horses run,
Just like their Master, by their speed undone.
