PHILIS.
O!  Damon, say, what grief o'erclouds thy face?
Why moves my swain with such disorder'd pace?
Why  heaves thy manly breast, with swelling sighs?
Or why suffus'd in tears appears thine eyes?
Where has my Damon's gleeful spirit flown?
His laughing muse, to all the village known?
Some happier maid has won my shepherd's heart,
And hapless Philis from her love must part.

DAMON.
Ungen'rous Philis!  sooner should the sun
Forbear his grand diurnal race to run;
Sooner the yew should quit its weeping rind
Than I'd prove false, or leave thy love behind.
But oh!  hast thou not heard the doleful tale
Which long shall cause sad shepherds to bewail?
Well may our eyes be bath'd in briny tears&mdash;
Well may we pine with sad corroding cares&mdash;
Well may we sigh and mourn, in ceaseless grief,
No lenient balm can give our souls relief&mdash;
Our hope, our joy, our comforter is fled&mdash;
Pan's mighty friend, the great Deburg &mdash; is dead!

PHILIS.
Now, now poor isle, the measure of thy woes,
O'erfill'd, above the brim in torrents flows;
Well may'st thou now with tears augment the tide,
Whose briny current leaves thy verdant side.
For us in vain the sun his glory yields;
For us in vain shall bloom the fragrant fields;
For us in vain the flow'ry meads are gay,
Or Sylvan songsters hail the infant day;
Nor sun, nor fields, nor meads can yield delight,
Divert our woes, or please our aching sight,
But sunk in solitude, opprest with woe,
Our ceaseless tears in briny streams shall flow.
He's gone!  the joy, the guardian of our plains,
Whose bounteous hand reliev'd the lab'ring swains,
Who bade our bow'rs to bloom, our pastures smile,
At once the shield and glory of our isle.

DAMON.
True, true my Philis, he was good, as brave;
As found t' adorn his country as to save.
His princely race from him new glory gain'd,
No selfish views his gen'rous bosom stain'd.
Who now from foes shall guard our fleecy care?
What local balm can ease our black despair?
Who now shall grant us pastures for our sheep?
None, none!  our friend is dead!  weep, shepherds, weep!

PHILIS.
O!  they shall weep, but weep, alas, in vain
Their hope is fled, yet still they may complain&mdash;
No more we join the dance in yonder grove,
No more we hear your dulcet lays of love.
No more the rustic reed shall cheer the swains,
Nor wake each echo of the neighbouring plains,
The silent trees, disrob'd of verdure, mourn,
And on the breeze their doleful sighs are borne:
The groans of Dryads fills the leafless wood,
And Shannon's maids swell with tears the flood.

DAMON.
Ah!  well I fear'd some direful ruin nigh,
To rend our breasts, and wake the constant sigh,
When, with the dawn, I drove my fleecy care
The verdant banquet of the plain to share,
My finest ram, the father of the train,
Fell ill, and, lifeless, sunk upon the plain.
When soon the vale resounds with doleful cries,
While mournful echo to the voice replies&mdash;
Our friend is dead&mdash;
O!  who shall now the helpless swain protect
From wanton insult, and from cold neglect?
Who now shall from the lawless spoiler shield
His little all &mdash; his cottage, sheep, and field?
When homespun tyrants rear'd their iron rod,
(Proud of the glittering of their golden god,)
To crush the swain, our great defender rose
To shield his shepherds from domestic foes:
Oppression shrunk beneath his mighty hand,
And ERIN hail'd him "guardian of her land."

PHILIS.
O!  Damon, let us not as yet, despair
Tho' we have lost De Burg's paternal care,
His lovely spouse, our bright Arcadian queen,
Will still protect her simple swains I ween;
Nor is her hand less ready to bestow&mdash;
What blessings from his bounty daily flow.
But, lost in grief the beaut'ous mourner lies,
All lenient balms her poignant woe denies.
But oh!  ye kindred seraphs, quickly bear
Soft consolation to your lovely care;
Long may she live with bounteous hand to bless,
And smooth the rugged road of sharp distress,
'Till her sweet cherubs, crown'd with ev'ry grace,
Adorn and dignify their princely race.
'Till, like herself, endow'd with heav'nly charms,
Her beauteous daughter fills some princely arms.
'Till the sweet youth (in infancy possest
Of all that warms and dignifies the breast,)
Shall tread those paths his noble father trod,
And serv'd his king, his country, and is god,
'Till far, far hand arrives that fatal day
When death shall bear her from this house of clay,
To reign in bliss &mdash; to strike the plausive string,
And hymn the praise of Heaven's eternal king.
