CANTACINI and FRIZEUR.

FRIZEUR.
Say, Cantacini, do not we receive
The utmost pleasure Indolence can give?
Say, are not ease and competence our own?
Have not our talents most divinely shone?
Can we not boast, that from a state obscure,
In rags and tatters miserably poor,
Ourselves we've rais'd, and wealth and pleasure taste,
Dream on the future, and enjoy the past?

CANTACINI.
How oft, Frizeur, (for willing Memory brings
To observation long-forgotten things)
Hast thou, with hast and zeal, officious ran
(For thou wast then a common Barber's man)
To bid the face a smoother surface wear,
Or curl in ringlets, or pig-tail the hair!
I, too, was then (but well you knew my state,
Dependent for a livelihood on Fate)
The humblest snuffer on theatric ground,
Lur'd by the Opera's enchanting sound.
Thanks to our stars, and Fortune's kind decree,
We rise to wealth, who starv'd on poverty!
Thanks to our stars, that on Britannia's shore
The fleeting skiff our languid bodies bore,
Worn with disease, with penury opprest,
To ease and affluence, to applause and rest.

FRIZEUR.
Yes, all those blessings we indeed enjoy,
And as we please each transient hour employ;
Can Garrick's natural, undecaying fire,
And sneering Foote's sarcastic pow'rs, admire;
Thanks to those lavish fools to whom we owe
All that we have, all Fortune can bestow,
In commerce see the plodding Dutch delight,
For gain who trade, and but for gain who fight;
In sloth and haggard superstition blest,
Behold the dull, the formal Spaniard rest;
Trifles and dress our fickle nation take,
And yours can solo's and concerto's make,
But see the poor degenerate sons appear
Of those who struck our Gallic race with fear!
Folly consummate reigns, and Lux'ry sheds
Her choicest blessings on her vot'ries heads.

CANTACINI.
Cease, cease, my Friend, this too empassion'd strain!
For gainers, surely, never should complain.
Tho' former Edwards, former Henry's rose,
And crush'd in fierce alarms their pallid foes;
And tho' a Bacon, Locke, and Newton taught,
Tho' Pope compos'd, and noble St. John thought;
The joint united labours of them all
Save not this Nation from th' impending fall.
