CLEORA.
The sun once more returns to glad our eyes,
All nature's joyous, and new beauties rise;
See o'er the verdant lawn, how blithe and gay,
The little lambkins join in festive play!
The lowing heifer, and the neighing steed,
Rejoycing gambol o'er the chearful mead.

SYLVIA.
I've mark'd them well, and hark from yonder bush,
I hear the sprightly warbling of the thrush:
The linnet too has tun'd her softer lay,
And chaunts sweet melody from ev'ry spray.
Awhile we'll sit beneath this covert's shade,
And contemplate the beauties here display'd.

CLEORA.
Thy mind, my Sylvia, gentle and serene,
Is well adapted to this sylvan scene.
There was a time when I like you was blest,
When all was calm within my peaceful breast:
But now, alas!  these days of bliss are o'er,
Nought now can please that did delight before.

SYLVIA.
Why should your mind a stranger be to rest?
What has disturb'd the tranquil of your breast?
The nymphs and swains in best array advance,
With pipe and tabor, to lead on the dance.
See how the youths with crooks bestudded round,
Come lightly tripping at the well-known sound;
With joyful looks, each lass is led along:
Let us, Cleora, join the happy throng;
And strive, by bearing in their sports a share,
To banish from your bosom ev'ry care.

CLEORA.
No, no, my Sylvia, you but faintly guess,
The pangs I feel, or height of my distress.
If you suppose that joys, like these, have pow'r
My grief t' alleviate e'er for one short hour.
When in the dance upon the green I join,
(If not with Florio) I've no wish to shine.
In vain it is the swains my voice admire,
Or in my praise attune the well-strung lyre.
There's none but him shall deck my flowing hair,
Or for my brows the myrtle wreath prepare.
Whether on verdant bank, or silent glade,
At noon day's scorching heat, or evening shade,
At that still hour, when Philomel alone,
Each grove makes vocal with her plaintive moan,
Still doth my Florio every thought employ,
Nor when he's absent can my heart know joy?

SYLVIA.
Forgive, Cleora, but I now must claim
A sisters privilege, and dare to blame.
Shall we frail mortals, blest with so much good,
With needful raiment, and with wholesome food,
When such rich blessings we receive from heav'n,
Arraign its goodness, that no more is given?
Do not the little birds thro' ev'ry grove,
Breathe forth their grateful hearts in hymns of love?
Shall we then (form'd with such superior sense)
Murmur and grieve, because Omnipotence
Does not at once our ev'ry wish supply,
Who knows not what's best to grant, and what deny?
No, rather let us in unceasing praise,
To heav'n's high throne our chearful voices raise:
Convinc'd it will each needful good bestow,
From seeming ills our greatest bliss may flow.
Sufficient this to ease your anxious breast,
What heav'n ordains is wisest, fittest, best:&mdash;
But see, the setting sun forbids our stay,
And evening shades obscure the face of day.
Quick let us hence, and as we homeward walk,
Beguile the tedious way with further talk.
