Whilst contemplating on this awful scene,
Oh may no worldly cares disturb my breast;
Nor aught to damp reflexion intervene,
Nor trifling thoughts the solemn theme molest.

Within these lonely mansions of the dead,
The rich and poor in heaps promiscuous lay;
From the fair cheek the lively bloom is fled,
Constrain'd perforce to mix with coarser clay.

Veil'd is the lustre of the sparkling eye;
In the cold tomb is lock'd the snowy face;
The well-turn'd features here neglected lie,
That, living, charm'd with each alluring grace.

Wither'd the poet's verdant-spreading bays;
Silent the orator's persuasive tongue;
No more he captivates in melting lays;
The soothing force of eloquence unstrung.

Nor longer does the sage to fame aspire;
To worms the hero now becomes a prey;
So soon shall vanish ev'ry fond desire,
When on our parent earth we cease to stray.

The proud, the humble, as if equals, join,
And peaceful slumber in the quiet grave;
The King, whom nations term'd almost divine,
Must mingle ashes with the meanest slave.

Then whence the fruitless sigh, the wish of pow'r,
The anxious pantings of th' ambitious mind?
When life's precarious as a summer flow'r
That's blown and wasted by an eastern wind.

What are your boasts, ye buzzing insects, say?
To courts, ambition, and to wealth a slave?
Their joys shall fade near truth's unerring ray,
And all their charms lie bury'd in the grave.

Come to this sculptur'd tomb, ye young and gay,
And let the monitor attention claim;
Learn here how soon your glories will decay,
When unto dust consign'd the brittle frame.

Then early bid adieu to flatt'ring vice,
To her delusive wiles, perplexive snare;
Ne'er let her arts the wav'ring breast entice;
With syren notes she ushers in despair.

E'en in the paths of pleasure as ye rove,
When fancy paints some fair and blooming joy;
Or, as ye careless wander in the grove,
Death's piercing shafts your anxious schemes destroy.

At that tremendous moment pleasure flees,
Nor spring, nor autumn's treasure yields delight;
State-splendor, with her pomp, forgets to please,
And all's involv'd in one continu'd night.

It stagnates all by its rapidious course,
Pleasures, pursuits, or what men bus'ness call;
And, by its boundless and impetuous force,
All seems a void 'neath this terraqueous ball.

Th' experienc'd statesman drops his tow'ring views,
Far weightier cares his doubtful soul employ;
The plodding miser gold no more pursues,
Nor in his hoarded mammon tastes a joy.

Resistless death, now throbs thro' ev'ry vein,
Convulsive pangs speak dissolution nigh;
How shall he bear the sharp afflictive pain,
If fair religion should her aid deny?

She to the virtuous soul still utters peace,
And whispers comfort and relief from woe;
That in propitious time their ills shall cease,
And the fair cup with endless bliss o'erflow.

Not so the guilty sinner looks on death,
To him in horrid shape and form array'd;
Earnest he sues to Heav'n, appeals for breath,
And vainly calls the healing tribe for aid.

Straight from the gloomy prospect let us turn,
And view that humble grave, with turf o'er spread;
Perhaps within its decent, sacred urn
Some blooming youth was most untimely laid;

Who, as a hopeful shrub had promis'd fair
Well to reward the planter's care and toil;
His father's troubles as his joys to share,
And bless his mother with a filial smile.

With kind parental eye each view'd the child,
And bless'd the happy hour that gave him birth;
Gaz'd on his looks, so innocently mild,
And thought the boy possess'd uncommon worth.

Dwelt on his words, on ev'ry pleasing art,
Such fond affection did their bosoms prove;
Little they thought from such a bliss to part,
Or soon to yield the object of their love.

But, when they saw the mournful seal of fate,
Spare, spare my child, kind Heav'n, the mother cries!
His life alone can ev'ry grief abate,
Raise ev'ry hope, and quell these heaving sighs.

But tears are vain to stop the settled doom,
Nor cries, nor bitter anguish, can delay
His early summons to the dreary tomb,
That house appointed for all human clay.

In this neat tomb's interr'd a lovely fair,
That once her sex outshone in ev'ry grace;
The snowy lily was not half so clear;
Spring's rosy bloom adorn'd her beauteous face.

Enamour'd with the maid, a virtuous youth,
Caught by her sweetness and superior charms,
Had, at the altar, vow'd mistaken truth,
Till death, grown envious, stole her from his arms.

How shall the muse their different pangs reveal,
Or words the height of tender woe explain!
Each strove their inward anguish to conceal,
And, sympathising, felt redoubled pain.

Proof how unstable ev'ry worldly bliss,
How short and fleeting ev'ry joy below,
When, in possession of the heart-felt wish,
We find it but the harbinger of woe.

Thus have I seen the sun with lustre rise,
And add new beauties to the smiling day;
But, when thick clouds obscur'd the azure skies,
Lost was the genial warmth's enliv'ning ray.

Hark, the bell tolls!  how awful is the sound!
At its sad tinkling ev'ry pleasure flees;
The sprightly bosom now forgets to bound,
And deep reflection all her powers seize:

Mirth is no more, nor music can inspire,
Or raise to harmony, the pensive breast;
The anxious soul to nobler views aspire,
And only thinks of her eternal rest;

Of the unalt'rable approaching change,
Whether to live supremely bless'd above,
Or scorch'd thro' liquid fires unceasing range,
And quite her title to redeeming love.

Oh!  tell, ye venerable relicts, tell,
What we shall be when time shall be no more?
Speak to th' echoing roof, the hermit's cell,
And friendly, this mysterious truth explore.

By thought severe, the philosophic mind
Searches within, and asks the reason why
The soul, forgetful, to her int'rest blind,
Has learn'd each science, but the art to die?

Has trac'd through nature's universal plan,
Her many changes, and her various laws;
But as he busy soars, the heedless man
Ne'er thinks that death's in ev'ry breath he draws:

That like some baleful poison, inward lurks
A portion, order'd for the sons of earth;
Hourly, within, its fatal influence works,
By Heav'n's appointment, from his early birth.

Yet, when the eye of man to roll shall cease,
It may hereafter with new lustre rise;
By angels usher'd to the realms of peace,
From whence each care and sharp affliction flies.

Then, e're we view our final setting sun,
Lest the alarming period should surprise,
As some experienc'd racer may we run,
Eager to gain the bless'd immortal prize.
