DAMON.
What distant region has so long detain'd,
What happy fate restores my dearest friend?
Can southern climes so long invite thy stay?
Are skies serener there, or flow'rs more gay?
Six times the moon has fill'd her silver horn,
Since Amaryllis sigh'd for thy return.
Welcome, O Thyrsis, to thy native plains;
Welcome the joy, the glory of the swains!
Here, on the margin of this limpid rill,
That rambling devious bubbles down the hill,
Repose thy weary limbs, forget thy toil,
And, pleas'd again, survey thy native soil.
The sun, now hast'ning to conclude the day,
Gilds the gay vallies with a milder ray.
Now plenty crowns the soft-declining year;
On ev'ry side autumnal scenes appear.
My flocks, in yonder solitary vale,
Bask in the ev'ning beam, and drink the balmy gale.
And see!  where, recent from my eager arms,
Array'd in all the majesty of charms,
My Sylvia walks the mead!  the cattle gaze,
And, fix'd in deep surprise, forget to graze!
While, gently warbling from the vocal grove,
The flute's soft languish speaks the voice of love.
&mdash;Alas!  what sadness clouds thy furrow'd brow?
Why wears thy tear-stain'd cheek the mark of woe?
While nature smiles, is sorrow only thine?
Oh!  speak the cause, and make that sorrow mine.

THYRSIS.
Too blest indeed, if Thyrsis yet could share
These rural joys, and intermit despair!
If yet 'twere mine to join the tuneful choir,
And sing what love and beauty's charms inspire!
Or with my nymph to tread the flow'ry plain!
Or, in the lonely dale, or fragrant bow'r,
Careless to dream away the vacant hour!
These are no more; for, urg'd by pow'rful Fate,
Comes the sad period of Britannia's state.
I see, exulting o'er our prostrate lands,
Grim with red rage and death, unnumber'd bands:
I see our plains with frequent corpses strew'd,
Our silver brooks profan'd with human blood:
I see our houshold-gods involv'd in flame,
Our hamlets hid in dust, without a name.
When long, long years their tedious round have pass'd,
Some hoary swain, that treads the silent waste
(Where the neglected soil, perplex'd with weeds,
The bloated toad and hissing serpent breeds)
Led by some stream along the desart plain,
May try to recognise his old domain.
Then, where Palladia stretch'd her verdant groves
(Haply the witness of his youthful loves)
Bleak naked rocks and barren heath he finds,
And hollow caverns howling to the winds.
And where, imbower'd in deep-surrounding trees,
The gay Laurentia rose, aghast he sees
An hideous length of frightful ruins strown,
And sordid thorns and leafless shrubs o'ergrown.
But first let my cold limbs in dust be laid!
O Death!  receive me to thy silent shade.

DAMON.
We trusted to an old report of fame,
That Britain on the ocean reign'd supreme.
No dire assault we fear'd of foreign hosts,
While yon caerulean main secur'd our coasts.
This fond belief perfum'd our vernal flow'rs,
Attun'd our rills, and lull'd our lonely bowr's;
This sooth'd the summer's sultry hours away;
This rais'd to loftier notes the raptur'd lay;
Smooth'd the rough face of winter's wasteful reign,
And with new plenty crown'd th' autumnal plain.
The boist'rous drum's reverberated roar,
The cannon's burst, that shook th' echoing shore,
Unmov'd we heard; and unappall'd survey'd
War's pompous scenes in grim array display'd.
But say, what crime has laid Britannia low?
What angry God has struck the mortal blow?

THYRSIS.
Ah!  sad remembrance of our ancient fame!
Where now our pristine pow'r and dreaded name!
Wide o'er the foaming deep our fleets of old,
In gallant splendor, triumph's uncontroul'd,
Soon as our streamers glitter'd in the gale,
Soon as the breeze impell'd the bellying sail,
The conscious tyrant trembled on his throne,
Britannia's sov'reign pow'r compell'd to own:
Oppression heard the rumour, heard and fled,
And pining slav'ry rais'd the pensive head.
But these illustrious days no longer smile;
Impending horrors cloud our destin'd isle;
Th' audacious crimes of a corrupted age
At last have rous'd the pow'rs of Heav'n to rage.
Long had the Gallic pride and thirst of pow'r
Ravag'd fair India's desolated shore.
T' avenge her injur'd sons Britannia rose,
And wing'd her thunders at the faithless foes.
But (oh, my friend, how dismal to relate!)
Fate baffled her attempts with foul defeat.
Rous'd at the last, to vindicate her name,
And wipe the tarnish from her sullied fame,
Sedately fierce, she summon'd all her might,
Bore dreadful on the foe, and claim'd the fight.
Extended far along the liquid plain,
I saw the gorgeous navy stem the main:
The flashy armour, kindling on the day,
Dazzled the cloudless sun's meridian ray.
I heard the martial shouts, the cannon's roar,
And loud acclaims resounding o'er the shore.
Proud of our strength, in thoughts we now survey'd
Our allies succour'd by the timely aid;
From hostile lands beheld the smoke aspire,
And cities sinking in tempestuous fire.
These dreams how vain!  no hostile turrets burn
Confus'd, aghast, our frighted fleets return.
'Tis said they saw unusual spectres rise,
Red from the deep, and gleam along the skies,
Perch'd on each poop a phantom stood confest,
And with presages dire alarm'd the bravest breast.
Now long-imbattled legions seem'd in view;
Now flam'd the livid deep with brimstone blue;
Portentous lightnings shot with fiery glare,
And horrid shrieks and thunders tore the air.
They saw, they fled &mdash; can feeble man withstand,
When Heav'n in anger blazes its vengeful hand!
Glory no more the warrior's bosom warms,
No more the warlike trumpet's note alarms;
Thoughtless of fame, of danger, and of woe,
In dumb suspence, he waits th' impending blow.
But haste, oh haste!  the murd'ring sword is nigh;
From these devoted regions let us fly,
To where no thirst of gold inflames the mind,
Where virtuous Peace a soft repose may find.

DAMON.
O War!  thou first of monsters, sire of crimes!
The hateful offspring of barbarian climes!
Rocks adamantine hatch'd the brood accurst,
Of all the worst of human ills the worst.
Farewel, my flocks, my fields, my milky kine!
These flocks, these fields, alas!  no more are mine!
Farewel, ye fountains, rills, and fragrant flow'rs,
Ye vocal woods, ye balmy-breathing bow'rs!
Farewel, my flute!  no more my blissful loves,
Tun'd to soft notes, shall fill the list'ning groves.
Farewel, my nymph!  my Sylvia, must we part?
O!  grief suppress my sighs, and burst my heart!
With thee no more I walk the winding shade,
Nor, in the lap of love luxurious laid,
Dissolv'd in bliss, dream ev'ry care away,
And with deep-felt delight thy charms survey.
O'er endless tracks of billowy oceans borne,
In sad exile for ever doom'd to mourn,
Perhaps hard bondage waits the tender fair,
And galling loads, and groans, and black despair.

THYRSIS.
Ye pow'rs!  oh bear me to some dreary vale,
Where ravens shriek, and owls portentous wail!
Where sullen skies diffuse perpetual shade,
And Night in all her horrors reigns array'd;
Impervious to the hateful blaze of day,
And silver Cynthia's melancholy ray;
Where ever-howling wolves the night confound,
And fiery snakes incessant hiss around.
There let me waste away this life of woe,
Nor pious friend the tender tear bestow.
Thy glorious days, Britannia, now are o'er,
And liberty and virtue are no more.
