The spring had now enliven'd ev'ry scene,
And clad the dusky park in partial green;
Gay op'ning buds peep'd thro' the winter rust,
And kindly show'rs had half wash'd off their dust.

On that dull day which, ev'ry week, affords
A glut of 'prentices, in bags and swords,
When sober families resort to pray'r,
And cits take in their weekly meal of air;
Whilst, eastward of St. Paul's, the well-dress'd spark
Runs too long miles, to saunter in the park:
Prudentio strolling down the mall was seen,
To loll upon a bench, and vent his spleen:
He meets Avaro on th' accustom'd seat,
And thus, in grumbling strains, the vet'rans greet.

AVARO.
Well met, Prudentio; come, man, sit you down:
How fare you?&mdash;

PRUDENTIO.
Sick of this confounded town.

AVARO.
Aye, so am I; time was, when it was said,
A penny buys a pennyworth of bread;
But now engrossers meet with no controul,
Your penny scarce will buy a farthing roll,
And good cheap things were cried from door to door;
But now the bakers get each week a rise,
And all provision double in their price.

PRUDENTIO.
How should it happen otherwise?  Look here,
What shoals of puppies every-where appear!
That fellow, with the tarnish'd suit of lace,
With insolence and folly in his face,
Must raise his soap and candles to afford
To dress himself, on Sundays, like a Lord;
Whilst that pert puppy, with the powder'd queue,
Must pay his barber out of me or you.

AVARO.
Time was, when sattin waistcoats and scratch wigs,
Enough distinguish'd all the city prigs,
Whilst ev'ry sunshine Sunday saw them run
To club their sixpences, at Islington;
When graver citizens, in suits of brown,
Lin'd ev'ry dusky avenue to town,
Or led the children and the loving spouse,
To spend two shillings at White-conduit house:
But, now, the 'prentices, in suits of green,
At Richmond or at Windsor may be seen;
Where, in mad parties, they run down to dine,
To play at gentlefolks, and drink bad wine;
Whilst neat post-chariots roll their masters down
To some snug box, a dozen miles from town.

PRUDENTIO.
I grant, that even prudence' self allow
The man of wealth his coach and country-house;
By common justice every man is taught
To taste those blessings which his labour bought;
But say, if candour can forbear to scoff,
When men begin just where their sires left off?
But trade to gain is now too slow a way;
Fortunes must rise, like mushrooms, in a day;
Hence sprung that most destructive mode of robbing
By dangerous under-writing, and stock-jobbing;
Ev'n merchants now laborious trade despise,
And find that money is best merchandise;
Hence springs the irrecoverable debt,
Hence WHEREAS fills each page of the Gazette.

AVARO.
Time was, when tradesmen laid up what they gain'd,
And frugally a family maintain'd;
When they took stirring housewives for their spouses,
To keep up prudent order in their houses;
Who thought no scorn at night to sit them down,
And make their children's cloaths, or mend their own;
Would Polly's coat to younger Bess transfer,
And make their caps without a milliner:
But now a shopping half the day they're gone,
To buy five hundred things, and pay for none;
Whilst Miss despises all domestic rules,
But lisps the French of Hackney boarding-schools;
And ev'ry face around Whitechapel bars
Resounds with screaming notes and harsh guittars.

PRUDENTIO.
Time was too, when the prudent dames would stay
Till Christmas holidays to see a play,
And met at cards, at that glad time alone,
In friendly setts of loo or cheap pope-joan;
Now, ev'ry Lady writes her invitations
For weekly routs to all her wise relations:
And ev'ry morning teems with fresh delights;
They run the city over, seeing sights;
Then hurry to the play as night approaches,
And spend their precious time in hackney-coaches.

AVARO.
Hence spring assemblies with such uncouth names,
At Deptford, Wapping, Rotherhithe, and Shad-Thames,
Where ev'ry month the powder'd white-glov'd sparks,
Spruce haberdashers, pert attorney's clerks,
With deep enamour'd 'prentices, prefer
Their suit to many a sighing milliner:
In scraps of plays their passions they impart,
With all the aukward bows they learn from Hart.
'Tis here they learn their genius to improve,
And throw by Wingate for the "Art of Love;"
They frame the acrostic deep, and rebus terse,
And fill the day-book with enamour'd verse;
Ev'n learned Fenning, on his vacant leaves,
The ill according epigram receives;
And Cocker's margin hobbling sonnets grace
"To Delia, measuring out a yard of lace."

PRUDENTIO.
'Tis true, my friend; and thus, throughout the nation,
Prevails this general love of dissipation:
It matters little where their sports begin,
Whether at Arthur's, or the Bowl-and-pin;
Or play at skittles at St. Giles's pound;
The self-same idle spirit drags them on,
And Peer and Porter are alike undone:
Whilst thoughtless imitation leads the way,
And laughs at all the grave or wise can say.
The prudent youth, whom some fond mother's care
Had taught to tread the subtle gamester's snare,
The first half year improves his own estate,
And visits not the mansions of the Great.
But thirst of pleasure lures him up to town,
And ev'ry sharper marks the pigeon down.
Destructive custom quickly draws him in,
He plays for trifles, and they let him win;
He doubles stakes, still feels no fatal rub,
And now is balloted at ev'ry club.
No more he dreads the rattling sound of dice,
And what was but amusement turns to vice;
He views the Faro-bank without affright,
And all his acres tremble ev'ry night.
So have I seen the cautious maiden fair,
Bred up in ignorance and country air,
Her first appearance make in this gay place,
And hang her head, and dread to shew her face;
A bashful, blushing, modest, tim'rous creature,
That fancies ev'ry man she meets will eat her:
But this improving air soon calms her fear,
She looks around, and spies no danger near,
In one short month learns how to play her cards,
And flirts it with a ensign in the guards.

AVARO.
All these are heavy truths &mdash; what can we say?

PRUDENTIO.
Why nothing &mdash; let the children have their way.
Our grave remarks will never make them wiser,
And sad experience is their best adviser.
But hark!  the palace-clock is striking three,
So ev'n go home and eat your beef with me.
