Sweetest Melancholy, thou matron, sage
And holy, admit me of thy pensive train,
Who oft have listen'd to
Thy strangely whisper'd strains;
Or thou, mild Thompson, Nature's meekest child,
Lead thy young vot'ry!  or, sweetest Shakespear,
First of Fancy's children,
From thy fine, phrensied lore,
Teach me to breathe some sadly soften'd note
Attun'd to song of dol'rous argument.
For gone is a sweet nymph
To the undiscover'd bourne;
From whence the youngest trav'ller ne'er return'd.
O rude-handed Death!  to crop so fair a flow'ret
Timeless, just when the spring
Of life began to blow,
So have I seen a lilly fair to-day
Soft smiling; to-morrow with rude embrace
Of ruffian mildew
Her dainty form disdain'd.
Or tell me, sweet wand'rer, did e'er thy soul
That chaste refinement feel (but known to few!)
Too tender fram'd to brook
The pangs of love despis'd.
Ah!  luckless maid, no wonder Friendly's skill
Bootless infus'd the well-concocted juice,
While lornless love canker'd
Thy fine-wrought strings of life!
And, now, no more thou'lt lead the festive dance,
Beguiling wolf-ey'd Winter's dreary night;
Where many a stripling
On the phantastic toe
Trip it with glee, warm'd by thy beauty's sunshine.
No more the cherub beauty on thy brow
Shall meekly sit inthron'd,
Nor roses paint thy cheek.
And never now that converse meek and mild,
That soft endearing grace, which ev'ry paint eludes,
Save the fine paint of thought,
Shall chear man's day!
But in thy lowly bed for ever sleep
Those comely merits, that op'ning to bloom
Had, in their summer's day,
Ripen'd to goodliest fruit.
Then, light, O earth, lie on her maiden breast;
And ye, whose fronts burnish with Fortune's gem,
Or gay Ambition's plume,
Who crop Pleasure's bri'ry rose,
Bestow the farewell &mdash; tribute of a sigh.
But ye who, fram'd in Nature's finest mould,
That thrill at the soft touch
Of Pity, dove-ey'd maid,
Pour the impassion'd tear, O Life, wond'rous
Is thy fleet day &mdash; dream, and what, or where we are:
We come, we know not whence,
We go, we know not whither.
