The month of fair Venus is fled,
Maia has quitted the scene;
Bright Juno now visits the shade,
And smiles at the nymphs on the green.
Who now, in simplicity drest,
Walk careless abroad in the morn;
A flow'ret now graces each breast,
And health does their faces adorn.

Tho' plumage ne'er nods on their heads,
Yet these can enamour the heart;
For beauty resides in the shades,
Where Nature surpasses all Art:
The Goddess in rapture surveys,
Nor can her attention remove;
"Thy daughters, Britannia," she says,
"Shall hence be the daughters of Love."

Thus saying, she wav'd her fair hand,
Dame Flora attends at her call;
"Sweet odours diffuse o'er the land,
And all thy gay carpet unroll:
For this is my festival day,
The zenith of all my mild reign;
Ye birds, swell your notes on the spray,
Rejoice ev'ry nymph with her swain.

"But first cull a chaplet with speed,
An elegant garden compose;
Take a slip from each flow'r in the mead,
In the midst place my favourite rose:
And lastly (each sense to invite)
Let blossoms of hawthorn be seen,
Let the myrtle and woodbine unite,
And thyme deck the margin with green."

Now Phoebus's heart-chearing rays
The dews from the meadow exhale;
Now, fiercer and potent, the blaze
Earth's inmost recesses assail:
O let me retire to the shade,
Beneath the oak's umbrage recline;
Invite the coy Muse to my aid,
While Nature with Art I define.

Now flutter the insects abroad,
In all their bright pageantry gay;
Whose period no respite affords,
How transient and short is their day!
Yet these are endu'd with quick sense,
Like thee they share pleasure and pain;
Be humble, vain mortal, and hence
From barbarous actions refrain.

The cataract, heart from afar,
With vigour inspirits my lay;
Let me Nature's suffrages share,
I ask not a sprig from the bay.
Tho' simple and artless the strain,
Thy beauties, O Summer!  I sing;
Shou'd Virtue make me of her train,
A yearly oblation I'll bring.

Sequester'd, and far in the vale,
Beneath the umbrageous retreat,
Palaemon rehearses his tale,
And sighs at his Phillis's feet:
Unpractis'd in treach'rous arts,
The virgin his passion approves;
The smile of consent she imparts,
And Hymen rewards their fond loves.
