Dun vested twilight brings in low'ring night,
Damp exhalations creep along the dale;
The bat, deserted, wheels his lonesome flight,
And Melancholy sighs in ev'ry gale.

Within this spot, where obscene birds of night
Nestle, and nod, and screech, alternate, round,
Soft Music floated once, whilst with delight
The distant Sailors caught the dying sound.

No more the warlike drum sounds o'er these plains,
Nor the shrill trumpets pierce the ambient air;
Where stood the Centinel, now silence reigns,
And Desolation murmurs, "Who comes there?"

Declining Commerce now, methinks, I see
In tears, reclin'd against the time-shook wall;
Com'st thou, O Youth, she cries, to pity me,
Com'st thou to mourn, or to withstand my fall?

Perhaps, in ancient times, when Rother's flood,
Roll'd swift and dreadful by those ruins wild,
Upon this very spot some parent stood,
And wept, with joy, to see her long-lost child.

Or when the ship, by swelling canvas prest,
Which parted lovers, faded on the view,
Here dropt the tender tear, here heav'd the breast,
Here wav'd the hand that gave the last adieu.

In days of yore, when first these walls arose,
Full many a tender pair, from yonder town,
Have joyful tripp'd this way at ev'ning's close,
And on the river's verdant side sat down.

Conversing, tender, on their future weal,
Whilst the lov'd offspring kiss'd the heaving breast,
The tear maternal down the cheek would steal,
Like thine, Eliza, when misfortune prest.

Yon grove, deserted, ruinous, and wild,
Whose brown top bends beneath the ev'ning breeze,
Is still the nurse of Fancy's airy child,
And seems to whisper how it once could please.

Imagination paints the flow'ry bed,
The stream below, the shady bow'r above;
Where some fond youth reclin'd his pensive head,
And spent the hours betwixt the Muse and Love.

His shade, methinks, now stalks majestic by,
Behold it glides beneath yon mould'ring wall;
His hand he waves, lo!  now he seems to sigh,
And thus Imagination hears him call:

"Dear Youth, whose lonely feet those ruins tread,
Whose down-cast eye lets fall the gen'rous tear,
Regard not transient life, which soon is fled;
Reflect on Heav'n and all the glories there.

"Blessings supreme, beyond the reach of thought,
Attend the man who often thinks on death;
Whose ev'ry deed is oft to judgment brought
By faithful Conscience, e're he yields his breath."

"Reflection cease," &mdash; methinks some voice replies,
"I solemn thoughts and groaning numbers hate;
Forsaken walls and ruins I despise;
Have me to banquetings and rooms of state."

To balls and banquets unmolested stray,
Let me in peace my wayward path pursue;
In viewing these I see my own decay;
If walls thus perish &mdash; I must perish too.

Struck by this thought, Reflection sallies forth
Thro' ev'ry path of life she trod before,
Weighs ev'ry action, views its spring and growth,
And what 'twill yield, when time shall be no more.
