Let titled rhymers flatter titled knaves,
Or bow obsequious at the nod of Kings;
My Muse alike detests the cringing slaves;
The gold-inspir'd Bard and theme he sings:
Simplicity, like her's, is rarely found
Amidst the pamper'd crowds that regal state surround.

'Ere gay Aurora streaks th' eastern sky,
Soon as the hours unbar the gates of day,
Shrill Chanticleer unseals Phylenor's eye,
True as the village-cock, and chides his stay;
His cot he leaves, and, as he moves along,
Whistles some jocund tune, or chaunts some rustic song.

Whate'er is task, he speeds along the plain,
Health on his cheek, and pleasure in his eye;
With silent raptures, views the brow-ear'd grain,
Exulting in the thoughts of harvest nigh,
When his good dame, with all her ruddy train,
Attends his steps, and gleans the freely-scatter'd grain.

Whate'er his labour at the noon-tide hour,
(For by his staff he measures time aright)
Phylenor hastens to some neighb'ring bower,
Urg'd by the call of craving appetite.
Oft have I seen the red-breast hopping there,
And with the gen'rous swain his scanty pittance share.

On the green turf, deliberately plac'd,
His open'd budget yields her homely store;
Yields him a coarse, yet strengthening repast,
And, Nature satisfy'd, he craves no more.
A crystal draught, the gift of neighb'ring springs,
At once allays his thirst, and health and vigour brings.

Full well, to till the fruitful glebe he knows;
In Autumn foremost of the reaping band;
Good Heavens!  what crops beneath his care have rose?
What harvests fell beneath his skilful hand?
In herbs his knowledge equall'd is by few;
He knows their names, and tells their sov'reign virtues too.

The sturdy oaks, the Monarch of the wood,
The forest's beauty, or the mountain's pride,
Fell'd by his prowess, brave the foaming flood,
And o'er the raging billows proudly ride;
Waft ev'ry climate's produce to our shore,
And bid around the world Britannia's thunders roar.

When all the labours of the day are o'er,
I've heard him, as he homeward bends his way,
Repeat a song he learn'd in days of yore;
Attend, ye swains, while I recite his lay.
Cease the plum'd choristers to hear his song,
Echo hills, groves, and vallies, as he plods along:

"How happy is the peasant's life,
And how unenvied too!
Remote from scenes of noise and strife,
His wants, his wishes few.

"Content with what his labour earns,
That brings him bread and health;
He pities those the world deems great,
The slaves to power or wealth.

"His share of blessings he receives,
From him who dwells on high;
Ah!  thus unenvied may I live,
And unlamented die.

"I ask no monumental stone;
Be flowers strew'd round my grave:
Light laid the green turf o'er my head;
No other boon I crave.

"When, from this long-impris'ning clay,
My happy spirit's fled;
Suffice it that the good folks say,
An honest man is dead."

His offspring meet, and hail him at his cot,
Whose clay-built walls resist the whistling wind;
The task, the labours of the day, forgot,
And not a thought of future toils behind.
Now groans his table 'neath its smoking pile,
Smiles the good man, his dame and all his children smile.

Oft do I spend, and those my happiest hours,
A winter's evening round his chearful fire,
Phylenor then exerts his mental powers,
And tells the tales transmitted by his sire:
His merry sire full often to be found
Amidst the festive laugh, and where the glass went round.

Tells how great Marlbro' Albion's foes o'ercame,
How Eugene conquer'd, and how Tallard fled;
How Britain's sons acquir'd immortal fame,
And heap'd Germania's plains with mountains of the dead.
His sire these noble glorious victories shar'd,
And in the foremost rank unmatch'd atchievements dar'd.

Perchance recounts the feats himself has done,
When beauty prompts him, or when glory fir'd:
How well he wrestled, and what prizes won;
Envy'd by whom, and by what nymphs admir'd:
Then shews the trophies of his greener years,
Adorn'd with which his cottage cleanly wall appears.

Shews the lac'd beaver, yet in all its pride,
His vig'rous arm from doughty Moeris won:
The crabtree cudgel too, so often try'd,
With which so many parlous feats he'd done:
This peerless weapon oft has born away
The envy'd long-contested honours of the day.

In social chat the ev'ning thus we spend,
Whilst nut-brown ale expands the good man's soul;
His offspring to the pleasing tales attend,
And willingly partake the full-crown'd bowl.
All happy to his smiles around him crow'd,
Till Morpheus' leaden wand their weary'd heads has bow'd.
I take my leave, Phylenor seeks repose,
And strength-repairing sleep her balmy sweets bestows.
