SCENE, THE MARGIN OF A RIVER; TIME, MID-DAY.

Where Phasis rolls his plenty-giving stream,
And Sol inverted plays with double beam,
Where Naiads rob'd in flutt'ring sedges play,
And wanton on the tide their chearful day,
A youth, by thoughtful meditation led,
On its smooth banks had laid his pensive head;
And while, tow'rds Heav'n, he cast each ardent eye,
Full oft his bosom heav'd a mournful sigh:
His mournful silence no rude steps invade,
For few there are that dare this spot pervade;
High o'er his head the pond'rous mountain grows,
From which the Phasis to the Euxine flows;
And other streams that wash the fruitful earth,
From thee, Caucasus, claim their source and birth;
While on thy slope the cedar and the pine
Exalt their lofty heads to vie with thine.

This youth, "unknown to fortune or to fame,"
A shepherd was, and Hassan was his name;
And while his flocks rang'd o'er the plain or grove,
In pensive strains he sung his artless love;
For long he'd lov'd, indeed no truer swain,
'Mong all her sons e'er grac'd Mingrelia's plain;
No wealth to boast, no luxury to spoil
The chearful moments when reliev'd from toil.

"Whither, ah!  whither, can'st thou tell me, groves,
(That erst have heard us speak our mutual loves)
Whither, ah!  whither, is Kaphira gone,
Heedless of Hassan's sighs, of Hassan's moan!
Passion!  thou wrong'st her, by force compell'd to go,
While her soft breast was torn with helpless woe.
Yes, tyrant Power!  by thy unhallow'd hand
Was torn distracted beauty from this land!
Why, ye transcendent Pow'rs, ah!  tell me why
Was the fair form'd so beauteous to the eye?
Why was she shapely as the myrtle grove?
Why did her accents tune the soul to love?
Her breath the fragrant orange could excel,
And richer sweets upon her lips did dwell
Than e'er pom'granate gave the eager taste,
Or all the dainties of the richest feast.
Oft in thy waters, Phasis, would she sport,
While Love and Beauty hither brought their court;
And when unmantled was the lovely maid,
In wanton blandishments the Graces play'd;
While love-inspiring beauty, gently lav'd,
Swell'd on the sight, and with the waters wav'd!
Curst be the tyrant's will!  the luckless hour!
That gave my charmer to despotic pow'r,
For she had sworn to bless the youth she lov'd,
Our friends consented, and the heav'ns approv'd;
When, lo!  as o'er the bosom of the mount,
She drove her flocks to quaff the chrystal fount,
A band of ruffian Tartars seiz'd the maid,
And from my sight the screaming nymph convey'd;
In vain I fought, in vain with ardour strove,
To rescue from their lawless hands my love;
Breathless and faint, o'ercome by many a wound,
They left me vanquish'd on the purple ground.
Yet I'll not loiter with cold reas'ning here,
Much injur'd maid!  I come!  Kaphira dear!&mdash;
Farewel, my friends, my flocks, my native grove,
Hassan returns not till he find his love."
