Nurse of each thought erect and bold,
Sweet poesy, whose fervid fire
Prompted the genuine sons of old,
With happiest hands, to sweep the lyre;
Parent of virtue!  haste along,
Like them instruct me o'er the listening throng,
From passion's flood, to pour the torrent of the song.

How blythe the season, when, of yore,
Crowding around the wintry blaze,
I learnt the legendary lore
Of the grey gossip's tragic lays.
Oh tell!  what mightier strain can now,
Make the rapt soul with such emotion glow,
Or bid the bounding blood with equal vigour flow?

Wandering, I mourn'd the buried brave,
Careless of night's unsocial noon,
When slept upon the glimmering wave,
The splendour of the summer's moon.
Ah, happy days!  serene and clear!
In memory's flattering glass your charms appear
Ting'd with the richest blooms of life's inconstant year.

But ah!  ye visions of delight!
Too fast your tarnish'd splendor fades!
Ye sink!  ye vanish from my sight!
While factions deep and dreary shades
Descend, while freedom, wan with care,
Flies from the hostile roof, with scatter'd hair,
And fetter'd genius comes her gloomy grief to share.

History, thy doleful valves unfold,
Bring forth the great of every age,
In blood their goary garments roll'd,
The martyrs of imperial rage.
The servile chain, the rod of power,
With baleful influence, blast the muse's bower,
They haste to happier climes, and shun th' oppressive hour.

'Twas thus, when Greece in ruin laid,
Prostrate, beneath the tyrant's arm,
They sought Ausonian freedom's shade,
Each breast with patriot passions warm.
Albion, they linger round thine isles,
Wishful, they gaze her fane where virtue piles,
And, o'er the Atlantic waste, a new creation smiles.

Let Europe, Cam, with hideous mien,
Light persecution's frightful fire.
Amid the general storm serene,
Bid thou the new-born thought aspire.
Let not thine hand its course controul,
Unbounded bid the seas of science roll;
Nor bind, in slavery's chain, the bold the vigorous soul.

Why should the gloom of antient years
O'ercloud the day-spring of the mind?
In youth renew'd, dispel thy fears,
And cast the wither'd slough behind.
Amid mortality's dear maze,
From hope's high cliff, let virtue's beacons blaze,
And, up perfection's steep, thine eye insatiate raise.

Wherever truth and reason meet,
Wherever worth, deserted, strays,
Do thou afford a generous seat,
And clasp them, with a friend's embrace.
Thine be the truly liberal plan,
And, dauntless, in the philosophic van,
Admit, with steady zeal, the dignity of man.
