CANTO I.
On Spring's mild evening when the Western gale
Breathes a calm quiet o'er the rural vale,
When all is silent save the pipe's sweet sound
Or lonely cuckoo in the woods around,
Returns the Shepherd from his labour o'er,
And children prattle at the cottage-door;
When Phaebus sets and when the mountain gleams
A feint-ting'd lustre from his golden beams,
Why does the hamlet far retired roll
A solemn pleasure o'er the troubled soul?
There in her loveliest dress does Nature shine,
There dwells fair Virtue and Content divine;
Nor does pale Vice or envious care annoy
This scene of quiet, this retreat of joy.

Go, man, with sorrow prest, and search for there
A cure for grief, a refuge from despair;
There shalt thou dwell with sweetly temper'd Peace,
Rosy-cheek'd health, and true poetic ease:
Taste, free from passion, in the verdant glen
A bliss not frequent in the haunts of men.
An equal calm, thy troubled breast shall know,
As when old Ocean from its depths below
Has roll'd huge waves, and stormy tempests pour
The foaming billows on the sea-beat shore.
But now, unruffled by the gentle breeze,
Still are the waters and serene the seas.

Grant me, propitious heav'n!  a humble cot,
Deep in the country, a sequester'd spot;
Far from the city, and the envious croud
Of praise penurious, but of malice loud:
Let poplars, elms, and oaks, the forest's pride,
Defend my hamlet on the Northern side;
And rising lofty from the covered plain:
Afford a refuge to the feather'd train
There let the partridge and the pheasant shun
The dread explosion of the sportsman's gun.
All-gracious God!  let not that murderer rove
With steps unhallow'd through my sacred grove;
Let thorns grow round, and let the timorous hare
From hounds pursuing, find a shelter there.
In murmuring streamlets let a fountain flow
Along the meadows to the woods below;
Around my wall the pliant woodbine glide,
And form an arbour at my cottage side.
Unbar the fasten'd gates, ope thou my door
Wide to the stranger and receive the poor;
Crown then my hopes, and make thy happy youth
Sacred to Virtue and her sister Truth!
Teach me to know thy will, oh teach me this
By blessing others to encrease my bliss.
What, though the dome be wanting at whose gate
In servile pomp the pamper'd menials wait!
What, though the pillar'd roof or marble pile
Does not auspicious on my dwelling smile!
Can massy plate, or rich embroider'd vest
Alter my transports or preserve me blest?

Why does not man resort, ere life yet fades,
To verdant groves and thought-inspiring shades?
Why seeks he not the philosophic cells
Where peace resides and meditation dwells?
There might he learn the greatest bliss below,
To rule his passions and himself to know.
Men of the world, true reason never finds
A transient empire o'er your fickle minds;
A dull rotundity of tasteless joys
Drowns every thought, and every sense destroys.
Go, fools insipid, ye shall never know
The heart-felt pleasures which from reason flow;
In fashion's whirlpool join, and roll along
Amidst the vortex of the public throng.
Far wiser he, who while he till'd his land,
Saw the proud Fasces and the Lictor's band
Around his ploughshare press, to lead from borne
The new Dictator of imperial Rome!
He sigh'd, and turning from ambition's charm,
"This year," said he, "will be untill'd my farm,"
And now the foes o'ercome, the battle o'er,
The soldiers hasten to their native shore;
The Chief resigns his post and hastes from Rome,
His cot to enter and to bless his home.
Around his knees his little children clung,
His wile with transport on her husband hung:
And, as she offer'd him hr eldest boy,
Addrest the hero with a smile of joy!
"I fear'd,  my Quintus, lest ambition's charms
Might chance to keep thee from my longing arms;
But now I banish hence my anxious pain,
And own with pleasure that my fears were vain."
The Chief reply'd.  "The servile croud, who wait
To bear my mandates, and the regal state,
Charm not thy husband, nor the wars alarms,
The trumpet's clangor, or the din of arms.
Let Jove bear witness from his heav'nly throne
The senate's will, my country's voice alone
Could prompt my soul o'er armies to preside
Far from my children and my much-lov'd bride.
Oft when to mortals midnight gave relief,
And all were slumbering save their watchful Chief,
Oft have I thought, Oh!  oft with anxious care
On thee, Attilia, and my children dear!
But now, since entered at my cottage door,
My joy is perfect and my bliss secure."

An equal glory does Dentatus share,
The bravest Roman in the Samnite war.
Thrice to be Consul o'er the State he rose,
Thrice did he triumph o'er his country's foes:
As oft retiring to his calm retreat
He left ambition and her dangerous seat;
There as the Chief in earthen vessels ate
The simple turnip and the frugal date;
The Samnite legates with rich treasures came,
Their gifts to offer and his aid to claim.
An honest indignation o'er his cheeks
Spreads a warm blush, while thus the warrior speaks.
"Think ye, O Samnites, I should meanly base
Pollute my glory and my deeds efface;
Think you to make me happy, that I need
A gilded dome, or ornamented steed?
'Tis by my pleasure, not the will of fate,
My cot is small, and unadorn'd my gate.
How could you falsely think that he who reigns
O'er hosts of Romans or embattled trains,
Who with an honest uncorrupted mind,
Gave Rome his plunder and his power resign'd;
With like disgust could unconcern'd behold
The spoil of kingdoms or a monarch's gold;
Would basely stoop and from thy hand receive
The paltry offers which aloe would give;
Vain were our hopes, deluded legates, go
Hence from this cottage; let the Samnites know,
Curius, though poor, with virtuous honour burns,
Their gifts despises and their offer spurns;
Rous'd at my country's call, I leave my home,
Disperse whole armies and the foes o'ercome;
And then returning from the war's alarms,
Seek my lov'd cottage and my consort's arms."

Thrice happy Rome!  had potent Caesar view'd
Such acts with pleasure, and such steps pursued,
His lawless army on their march restrain'd,
Obey'd the senate and from arms refrain'd!
Would he had spar'd with sacrilegeous hands
To wage a warfare on his native lands!
Ah, no, he marches from the Gallic bounds
With hostile movements to attack thy grounds
And fords the Rubicon.  The foe to meet
Arose great Pompey from his calm retreat,
As the grim lion in the forest deep
Ferocious muses from a troubled sleep,
When mastiffs eager for the chace and men
Pierce the dark thickets and surround his den;
Dreadful he roars, his eyes with fury glare,
The hound then trembles and the huntsmen fear.
The mighty Pompey to defend the coast,
Thus rose majestic, in himself an host;
The sons of Liberty with ardour flow
Around their leader:  he attacks the foe.
Mysterious heav'n!  the greatest Chief in Rome,
The trusty guardian of her laws at borne,
Who once destruction from his country hurl'd
On all her foes, the master of the world
Now lies, forsaken by his numerous bands,
A lifeless corpse neglected on the sands.

To Cato next devolv'd the sacred trust,
Cato the wise, the glorious, and the just!
Whose fame, in spite of superstition's chains
Of gloomy honors or tyrannic reigns,
Shall pass refulgent, pure, from clime to clime
In golden pages 'till the wreck of time.
He marshalls armies on the Afric coast,
King Juba aids him with a tawny host;
But mighty Caesar, as a torrent strong,
O'erwhelm'd his warriors and dispers'd the throng
With speed they fly to Utica, and there
Mourn their lost country and indulge despair.
Unvanquish'd Cato dares alone to strive
To cheer their spirits and their hopes revive,
But strives in vain.  Can mortal force withstand
The Fates' stern empire, or th' Almighty's hand?
He finds at length his hopes are vain, and calls
His friends around him in the Utic walls;
Advis'd them all to shun the victor's might,
And trust no longer to the useless fight:
These to seek pardon from the foe, and those
To weep in silence for their country's woes.
"I fear him not, said he, nor will I fly,
I spurn the tyrant, and his threats defy!"
His friends reluctant part.  The godlike man
Turn'd to young Portius, and these words began:&mdash;
"Oft have I, Portius, strove to stop the course
Of base corruption or allay its force:
Oft to aid virtue and the laws defend,
The foe of tyrants, and my country's friend.
But all was useless 'gainst the will of fate,
A factious people, and corrupted state;
Yet would I not exchange my virtuous name
For Caesar's empire and his ill-gain'd fame.
My friends advise me or to seek by flight,
A dubious safety or to own his might;
But may the stormy main or yawning ground,
While free, receive me in its depths profound!
Or by great Jove may I be headlong hurl'd
To gulphs Tartarean and the Stygian world!
Ere Cato, base, to kiss that hand descends,
So oft made bloody by his country's friends!
When Virtue strives against the bad in vain,
The post of honour is the rural plain:&mdash;
Seek, then, my Portius, since our hopes are foil'd,
The Sabine country where thy fathers toil'd:
There till thy lands; the well-till'd lands will grant
A bounteous produce and supply each want;
Contentment flying from the gilded room,
Will dwell with rapture in thy humble dome:
Strife and Ambition shall be chac'd away
By Peace irradiant as the god of day.
There study Nature and let learning find
An easy access to your generous mind,
Let mild philosophy your time employ,
And arts and science shall encrease thy joy.
Let brave Marcellus, and that virtuous youth
The son of Freedom and the friend of Truth
Immortal Brutus, and his faithful wife
Partake the blessings of thy happy life.
Believe me, Portius, not the crouded court,
The pomp of senates or the king's resort,
The croud of clients, or the marble pile;
The gilded palace nor the flatterer's smile;
Bestow such blessings as await thy lot
If friends like these surround thy humble cot."
He spoke, and sought his tent, prepar'd to meet
His latter moments in a calm retreat:
Reads Plato, o'er his thoughts enraptur'd fly
Where virtue triumphs in her native sky.
At length, he calls to mind the falling state,
The loss of freedom and his ill-starr'd fate;
And, sad, despairing of his country's cause,
The dreadful poniard from its scabbard draws;
(Where God of Justice is thy arm to save
The wrecks of freedom from the opening grave?)
Feels the dread point, and piercing through his breast,
Sunk with his fathers to eternal rest.

But youthful Brutus to his fame succeeds,
And dwells with rapture on the stoic's deeds.
Brought up amidst the academic shades
And peaceful dwellings of th' Aonian maids,
The goddess, Liberty, had form'd his mind)
Matured his reason, and his thoughts refin'd;
(Expell'd from Rome, she join'd her sister Truth
And dwelt, transported, with her darling youth)
And mild Philosophy, to please her, shed
A balmy influence on her hero's head.
The well-taught leader rises from the groves
To aid his country, and to Rome removes;
As the bright sun emerging from a cloud,
In native dignity and lustre, proud,
Expels the darkness which o'erhung the day,
Cheers up the gloom, and drives the fog away,
Thus does the Chief in Virtue's garb array'd,
Emerge, refulgent, from the rural shade.

Ambitious Caesar fortify'd his throne
With force oppressive, but one path alone
Was left unguarded, and remain'd for those
Who priz'd their freedom and would slay its foes
They pass the easy gate, they climb the walls,
Oppression totters &mdash; and the tyrant falls.
Once more, the sons of Liberty regain
Their wonted courage, and are arm'd again!
But Caesar's veterans with fury pour
Against great Brutus, on the Grecian shore:
But, scarce oppos'd, the hostile camps were seen
Along the coast, a little space between,
When darkness now with sable wings, hangs o'er
The eager troops, and overspreads the shore;
Brutus, alone wrapt up in anxious thought,
A calm retirement from the battle sought:
When (as report declares) a spectre form
Rose from the around, tremendous as the storm.
Aloft in air he rais'd his giant head,
And cast his eyes around; Brutus, he said,
"I am thy evil spirit at Phillippi's plain
Expect me next."  "We then shall meet again!"
The Chief replied, undaunted by the sight,
And waited anxious for th' approaching light.

But, now arrives the fatal morn, to bring
Death to brave Brutus, and to Rome a King:
The sun, portentous, on the mountains shed
A bloody tinge, and dy'd the clouds with red:
On either side the soldiers view the sight
With solemn horror, and demand the fight;
Rous'd by the trumpet, they prepare their arms,
And pant with ardour for the war's alarms,
Waves the dread signal, and the groans rise
Of vanquish'd soldiers, or the victors cries.
Stretch'd on the ground the troops of Cassius lie,
Slain by Octavius, or inglorious fly.
The foes pursue.  They toss the flaming brands,
And burn the camps along the sea-beat strands:
The leader views with deeply troubled breast,
His tents all flaming, and his troops oppress'd.
"Alas" cried he, "in this destructive fire
Does Freedom suffer, and her cause expire.
Gods!  let me perish on this fatal shore,
Since Rome is vanquish'd, and her fame no more.
That men may hence to after ages tell
That Cassius perish'd when his country fell."
He said, and pierc'd his breast; the spouting gore
Bursts from the wound, and stains the bloody shore.
Brutus, meanwhile, the adverse troops assail'd,
They fly his fury, and his might prevail'd.
But while fair Conquest dawn'd around his head,
He heard with horror that his friend was dead.
"There," said the Chief, and as he spoke he sigh'd,
"The last and bravest of the Romans dy'd.
Why did I leave my dear, delightful shade,
In hopes to save thee, and thy friends to aid,
Imperial Rome?  alas, I did not know
That vice could triumph in this world below.
For thee, I left my native rural air,
For thee, my studies, and my consort dear,
Left all my pleasures.  What rewards await
Such virtuous actions but a bitter fate?
How were my hopes by foolish fancy buoy'd
That vice would fall, not Virtue be destroy'd!
"False, fleeting hopes, ne'er destin'd to be true,
Then welcome, death!  poor, slavish Rome, adieu."
He spoke, and pierc'd his heart; his body dies,
His soul immortal seeks her kindred skies.


CANTO II.
Thy haunts, Retirement, and thy peaceful shade,
Are doubly grateful to the beauteous maid
With love imprest; and please the youth, whose heart
The son of Venus with a golden dart
Has wounded deep:  his mind enraptur'd there
Hangs o'er the image of his much lov'd fair.
No thirst of gain, no passions intervene
To check his transports, or disturb the scene:
Sweet are his thoughts; for in the humble cell
By worldly objects unemploy'd they dwell
(Heighten'd by nature and, the verdant groves)
With double rapture on the fair he loves.
'Gainst the green grott with pleasure does he lean
Where Emma's presence had endear'd the scene.
"Here, said he, (well I recollect the hour)
Here Emma seated in this shady bow'r,
Heard my fond tale of love.  The flow'ry race
Grew round the Arbour and perfum'd the place;
I pluckt the choicest violet (for I knew
Her fav'rite colour was a lovely blue)
The flow'r presenting, much I trembled while
My gift she notic'd with a gracious smile.
Her smiles soft thrilling through my ardent veins,
Restor'd my courage and reliev'd my pains.
Behold, said I, how bounteous nature pours
A rich profusion for these happy shores!
Hark, how the lively birds around us sing,
And hail the prospect of returning Spring;
From yonder poplar hear the cooing dove
Court his lov'd mate, and woo her soul to love.
The Fates (and much their gifts I prize) have shed
Unnumber'd blessings on my happy head.
Far as the eye can reach, the fields are mine,
Whole flocks of lambkins, and whole herds of kine.
But, as the father of the world, when blest
In peaceful dwellings, where immortals rest;
Still in his bosom found a void unknown,
Till Eve, to love him and his bliss to crown,
Jehovah form'd.  Thus, without thee, my fair,
My plains deserted and forlorn appear.
Then, dearest Emma, since my heart is thine,
Complete my bliss and let thy hand be mine.
I ceas'd.  The Gods alone are fit to hear
The charming accents of my beauteous fair!
How was I blest such heart-felt joys amid
When blushing Emma in my bosom hid
Her deep-ting'd face:  All-gracious there confest
The love she foster'd in her glowing breast,
Consented to be mine next harvest home,
Pass swift, ye days, and let the harvest come.
Frown not, ye proud ones, on her humble state,
Small is her fortune &mdash; but her virtues great.
What though no slaves in livery'd pomp prepare
With hireling duty her commands to bear,
What, though no vain desires assail her breast,
Nor purple glitters on her flowing vest?
That sun, which gilds the stately poplar, throws
An equal lustre on the village rose."

In haunts like these, with Abelard content,
Her joyful time fair Eloisa spent.
There does she, happy, as she walks along
The murmuring rivulet, or the woods among,
Hang on his arm; and smiling in his face,
The sweet emotions of her lover trace.
At dawn, awaken'd by the lark's sweet lays
They rise, and rising, their Creator praise.
Thanks be to thee, Almighty God of all,
Guardian of good, by whom the guilty fall,
Thanks be to Thee for all thy blessings sent,
This valued cottage where resides content!
These plains extending through the wide campaign,
And fields now covered with the ripening grain;
But let not, Lord, thy grateful servants prove
Of Thee unworthy, or neglect thy love!
Oh let the virtuous and the needy share
Those gifts thou grantest to our earnest pray'r!
Thus they th' effusions of their bosom pour
To great Jehovah, and his pow'r adore.

They next proceed with philanthropic zeal,
To aid the needy and the sick to heal;
(Delightful Pair, whose peace-imparting breath
Expels all anguish from the bed of death)
Pleas'd, as they pass, the grateful rustic now
Salutes the lovers with a clownish bow.
To show their love, the artless children seize
Their flowing garments, or embrace their knees;
Although the father on the prattlers frown'd,
Or chid their freedom as they play'd around.
Content they cuter at the cottage door,
Amidst the blessings of the numerous poor
There, free from envy or ambitious strife,
Blest with each other, pass a happy life!
They aid the poor, or read amid the bow'rs,
While love and duty claim alternate hours.

Hapless his lot!  on whom no charmer smiles,
No love awakens, and no hope beguiles.
Sad are his days by Fates condemn'd to prove
The frowns of beauty, and the pangs of love.
For him, his mistress' air and noble mein
But form new tortures and increase his pain;
For him, no sweetness with alluring grace
In smiling dimples sport around her face;
For him, no sparkling eyes with pleasure gleam,
Nor flowing ringlets on her shoulders stream.
That beauty which dispenses bliss around,
With rankling venom, but inflames his wound,
How will he storm, to view her scornful eyes
Neglect his passion, and his love despise!
To see some rival with encircling arms,
Clasp his fond fair one, and enjoy her charms!
His brain with fever burns; his eye-balls roll
With rage expressive of his frantic soul.
Such, mad Orlando, was thy ill-starr'd lot,
Thyself neglected, and thy love forgot.
The swains, ill-fated, from the mountain's brow
Hurl'd by thy force amid the plains below;
And timid wild-beasts with a rapid flight,
Rush through the forests and confess thy might.

Ah!  wretched man, whom Fates have doom'd to mourn
A hopeless passion, and a mistress' scorn,
What, but thy charmer's love avails to cheer
Thy maddening sorrow or dispel thy care?
Does there no hope, no comfort else remain
To soothe thy anguish, and relieve thy pain?
There does.  Go, seek the peace-imparting shade,
The wood-bin'd cottage and th' embowering glade;
There learn, retired from thy charmer's view,
To rule thy passions and thyself subdue.
The rural plain, the silent groves impart
A soothing pleasure to the troubled heart.
As hapless he, who, when he hopes to find
His love requited, and his mistress kind,
Perceives some fate, too cruel, intervene
To cross his love, to change the grateful scene!

Some tyrant father, whose penurious mind
In nought but wealth can any pleasure find;
Whose crouded chest with glittering jewels shines,
Or added treasure of Peruvian mines!
On gold his thoughts, on gold his wishes rest,
Gold the chief pleasure of his sordid breast.
For this, penurious, from.  his mistress dear,
He parts the lover and condemns the fair
To long confinement; there her tears but flow,
To mourn his absence and lament her woe.
There does she pass, a prey to stern Despair,
Her days in sorrow, and her nights in care.
He trusts hard usage there his child might move
To spurn her Henry, and forget to love.
How vain the task!  for nought but reason finds
A lasting empire over virtuous minds.

Some jealous husband, to whose brutish bed
Condemn'd, a charmer finds each pleasure fled:
Vain are her sighs, unhappy, she compares
Her past enjoyment, with her present cares
With grief remembers, when an artless maid
She walk'd the grove, or through the meadow stray'd;
There did a loving youth her time beguile,
With mark'd attention and awake each smile;
But, though the rising wish her soul may move,
To view the darling of her virgin love,
With love, with honor, and distraction fraught,
The wish she crushes, and she checks the thought.
But him, unconscious of her glowing charms,
No love enlivens, and no rapture warms;
Like the rough Indian, whose unpolish'd hands
Find a rich jewel on the Eastern sands,
At first, well pleas'd, the shining gem surveys
Its matchless splendor, and reflected rays;
At length, neglectful, with disdainful eye,
He spurns the prize, and throws the treasure by.
Meanwhile, no hope can soothe the lover's grief,
His sorrows calm, or give his mind relief;
Through rural beauties he delights to rove,
The rural beauties form a cure for love.
Thus, Youthful Petrarch, from the world retir'd,
With boundless virtue, and with honor fir'd,
Leaving his Laura (arduous task!) o'ercame
The stern dominion of his ill-starr'd flame.

Hail!  blest Retirement!  whose imperious sway
Each lawless passion, and each vice obey;
Long o'er the world thy grateful rule extend,
The guard of virtue, of mankind the friend!


CANTO III.
Why does the soldier, from his home afar,
Tempt the rude dangers of the sanguine war?
Why does the merchant send his vessels o'er
The seas of Europe to the Indian shore?
Watch the rich fleet; which bears with fortune's smiles
Peruvian treasures to the British isles?
Why does the miser for his darling wealth,
His life endanger, and destroy his health?
In hopes his labours and his toil engage
A calm retirement for declining age.
For this, the British Tar, alert and brave,
The storm despises, and defies the wave.
He knows his country for her sons prepares,
To bless the aged, and relieve their cares:
He knows a palace stands, where father Thames
Rolls the strong current of his silver streams.
Hail, grateful Albion!  whose propitious laws
Reward the patriot who defends thy cause!
Long be thou just, and let thy warriors claim
In age a refuge, and in youth a name.

Behold!  the virtuous man with toiling strife,
Pass through the mazes of uncertain life,
The walk, the thicket, and the plain he tries,
The haunts of virtue, or retreats of vice;
Oft does he find the modest glow-worm light
Of merit darken'd, or oppress'd by might;
That knowledge often, and that wisdom sleeps,
While serpent Vice amid the garden creeps,
And taints the flowers as it glides along,
The shrubs luxurious or the plants among.
What toils!  what evils!  does his virtue bear,
Oppress'd by fortune, but above despair.

Perhaps a Patriot, in his country's cause,
He dares corruption, and defends her laws!
In spite of pow'r, in lawless tyrants spite,
He guards the people, and protects their right!
The ruling Despot views with jealous eyes
His deeds are virtuous and his counsels wise!
When power threatens, and when danger's nigh,
The faithless people from their guardian fly
Too late, regardless of the world, the sage
Now falls a victim to the tyrant's rage.

Perhaps a Soldier on th' embattled plain,
He stands the foremost in the warrior train!
His steps should triumph through the battle lead,
Or wave her banners o'er the hero's head,
The croud inconstant on their joys awhile,
With fond attachment on their leader smile:
But soon, intent on other thoughts, they slight
His fame in battle and his deeds in fight.

As, when (while winter's hoary frost congeals
The rain descending on the whiten'd fields)
The swain returning to his cottage now,
Imprints his footsteps on the falling snow;
The snow, still falling, through the aether glides,
Destroys each footstep, and each vestige hides;
Thus, from the people novel sights efface,
Each deed now past, each once remember'd grace.

How false!  how faithless!  are the senseless croud,
In hatred now, and now in praises loud;
Nor has the tempest nor th' inconstant winds
More frequent changes than their fickle minds.
Hapless is he, whose dubious bliss depends
On hopes so wavering, such uncertain friends!
Behold him now their gracious fav'rite rise,
He now, deserted, from his country flies!
Thus, brave Camillus, did ungrateful Rome
Expel the; banish'd from thy much-lov'd home;
What did thy conquests o'er the foe obtain?
A dwelling distant from thy native plain:
What did thy wounds among the hostile band?
Ah!  wounds inflicted by thy country's hand.
These honors from the croud, these ills await
Those bravely virtuous, or exceeding great.

Perhaps, on warring ships he dares to leap,
And tempts the dangers of the stormy deep;
Bold in his country's cause, the tempest braves,
And rolls her thunder o'er the liquid waves:
Should his bold fleet with fav'ring fortune crown'd,
Urge hostile vessels through the vast profound,
If Gaul's proud navy, flying, vanquish'd, falls
Beneath the thunder of our wooden walls,
What praise, what glory shall the hero gain?
What joys await him on his native plain?
The transient favors of a wavering croud,
Reward the chief in conscious virtue proud,
But should (oh may the world-directing pow'r
Forbid the evil, and avert the hour)
Ah!  should the foe with force superior claim
The palm of conquest, and reward of fame,
Like unripe corn beneath the reaper's hand,
He falls, the victim of his native land.
Should he not fall, he's ill-starr'd doom'd to bear,
The smile contemptuous or disdainful sneer,
A loath'd existence to the silent tomb
Will urge his footsteps, and his days consume;
Such scorn, such ills, such miseries await
The virtuous, labouring under adverse fate!

Perhaps, of Virtue's cause the certain trust,
He guards the wretched, and protects the just;
Of injured merit pleads the suffering cause,
The chief protector of his country's laws.
Should crouded courts and listening people hang
With admiration on his bold harangue,
If, from the bar he pleads, and pleading rolls
Persuasion's mildness o'er their untaught souls,
Or mingles aptly in his moving piece
The fire of Tully, and the strength of Greece,
Should gathering virtues in his bosom meet,
And Envy's arrows fall beneath his feet,
Some tyrant's shaft will surely pierce his side,
Thus fell the Grecian, thus the Roman dy'd.

Thus in the world the man of virtue strives,
Impell'd promiscuous as the tempest drives.
As, when the winds their stormy fury roll
O'er heaving billows from the Northern pole,
And through the deep the yielding vessel hurl;
Their shatter'd sails the skilful seamen furl,
Now here they run, now here they haste, to keep
Their tottering vessel from the yawning deep,
Till o'er the surface of the foaming seas
An harbour opens to their eager gaze;
They hail the land, they pass with transports through
The wish'd-for haven which appears in view.
Thus, does the virtuous man, expecting, wait
With equal pleasure for that happy state,
When far retiring from the public noise,
The world he quits, and all its transient joys.

Take heed, ye youths, be timely wise, and hear
The words of reason, with a willing ear;
Attentive hear, and learn those maxims well,
Which wisdom dictates, and the aged tell.
'Tis ours, to treat with reverent awe the sage,
And mark the lessons of instructive age.
Experienc'd judgment, passion-free, is theirs,
Extent of knowledge, and the weight of years.
We, void of thought, by passion urg'd along,
Rash in our judgment, in opinion wrong,
Would, undesigning, miss the dubious gate
Which leads to glory's or to virtue's seat,
Did not the aged, in experience wise,
Avert our danger, and our steps advise.
"The world," say they, "the world deceitful wears
A face of pleasure, but a heart of cares,
Ye generous youths, who tread the soil, beware
The smooth-tongued villain, and the harlot's snare;
Oh shun the syren, nor to pleasure yield,
A deadly snake is in the grass conceal'd.
Let not ambition tempt thy dazzled sight,
Sure danger hovers o'er her tow'ry height;
And thou (when dreaming no destruction nigh)
May'st fall like Tarquin, or like Caesar die!
But rather flying from the crouded towns,
Of courts the splendor or the pomp of crowns;
With learned friends, and choice companions, hail
The sweeter pleasures of the rural-vale.
There shall rich Plenty's loaded hands prepare
The varied presents of the rolling year;
On thee her influence shall Contentment send,
And rugged Labour on thy steps attend.
To her own glooms discordant strife expel
To realms of darkness or the gates of hell.
Let meek-eyed Peace around thy cottage rove,
And Pity gentle as the turtle dove,
But oh, cease not, cease not, blest man, to raise
Thy voice with rapture to Jehovah's praise!
For know, those fruitful plains, those herds of kine,
Those numerous blessings are not truly thine,
Not thine; but trusted to thine hand, that thou
On suffering virtue may thy gifts bestow.
Then, not to thee, shall bloated Envy yell
Her direful barkings, or with venom swell;
Nor vile Hypocrisy her snares extend,
Nor luring Flatt'ry to thy failings bend:
Free from those passions which disturb mankind,
No vicious struggles shall distract thy mind;
Joyful shall be thy days, thy sweet repose
Soft as the Zephyrs or the morning dews.
Then shall thy lives, thy happy lives, be then
As pure, as guiltless, as the first of men."

These are the maxims and the warnings these,
Which age advises and experience sees.
But oh, when striving to avoid those strands,
Beware, ye rush not on the adverse sands;
Far, far, remov'd is such a happy life
From monkish horror, and fanatic strife.
In thee, Jehovah, Lord of Hosts, we trust,
Thy works are awful, and thy ways are just!
Nor can thy creature, earth-begotten man,
Judge of thy actions, or thy wisdom scan.
For some great purpose did this darkness reign,
Some purpose hidden from the human brain.
But now, thy light with double lustre shines,
Now fall fanatics and their sway declines:
Injurious priests no more the people fleece,
And warring nations my be leagued in peace.
Great are the ills which furious zealots bring,
Great are the evils which from cloisters spring.
But 'mong the wretches who have perish'd there,
Th' unpitied victims of a sad despair,
Permit not, Muse, a virtuous pair to fall
A prey to all-consuming age.  Recall
Their spotless fame from superstition's gloom,
Too long descended to the silent tomb!

In southern France, where fertile Nature pours
A rich profusion from her inmost stores,
There stood a mountain on the Northern side
In height stupendous, and in circuit wide;
Beneath a vale, where Spring eternal rul'd,
Warm'd by the sun, and by the zephyrs cool'd,
Delicious fountains from the neighbouring hills,
Harmonious trickled in meandring rills.
The scented citrons grateful arbours made,
And pliant wood-bines form'd a ready shade.
In untill'd plains around, spontaneous grew,
The beauteous lily and the violet blue,
Through the whole year the verdant orange blows,
The blooming hyacinth and blushing rose.
In this sweet spot, in his delightful place;
Matilda, fairest of the female race,
Dwelt in a villa on her native grounds,
Remov'd and distant from the noise of towns.
Content, and conscious of her bliss, the maid
Preferr'd the pleaures of the rural shade,
Priz'd her own woods above the joys, which wait
On guilty cities, or imperial state.
To that dear valley were her thoughts confin'd,
There hung her wishes, and there dwelt her mind,
For there, resided near her native plains,
Henry, the bravest of the village, swains.
His was each noble virtue that could grace
Or add new lustre to the manly race.
Could such a pair, each other view, unmov'd?
Too soon they saw, too soon they dearly lov'd.
Unhappy love!  from thence the fates decreed
Their hearts to suffer and their breasts to bleed!
(For oh, when oft our beating bosoms glow
With heart-felt pleasure, are we check'd by woe).

A sainted bigot was Matilda's sire,
A zealot burning with religious fire;
Long had he wish'd before he reach'd the tomb;
To fix his daughter in a convent's gloom.
Wretch!  not to know that what thou hast design'd,
Is curst by God, and hateful to mankind!
In vain his child, to his averted ear,
With painful anguish thus addrest her prayer:&mdash;
"Beware, my father, lest thy daughter fall
A wretched victim to a cloister's wall;
Blest am I now; for what I hold most dear,
Dwells in this spot, and is concenter'd here.
Then, oh my sire, thy dreadful purpose wave,
Nor doom thy daughter to an early grave;
For sure a hermit's life, a convent's gloom,
Would soon consign me to the darksome tomb!"
Thus spoke Matilda, with distraction wild,
And thus, the father, "Go, depart, my child,
(For well I know, I know, oh dire disgrace,
Thy thoughts are centered in another place)
Prepare for other worlds, and learn the road
Which led thy Saviour to his parent God!"
He spoke; and firm in his design remains,
Her folly pities, and laments her pains.

Now to the convent grate, Matilda flew,
To bid her Henry, and the world, adieu!
But ah!  what strains, what language can express
The painful struggles in each lover's breast
When the barr'd gate, Matilda gazing through,
Saw her lov'd Henry now appear in view:
She falls, unable to support the shock,
Pale as the snow, and frigid as the rock.

The frantic Henry to the mountains flies,
Weeps to the cliffs, and to the tempest sighs!
There, hid from men, with maddening grief complains,
Of lost Matilda, and her lover's pains.
Calls lov'd Matilda from the rocks around,
Matilda's name, the hollow rocks rebound,
The youth, with transport, listens to the sound.
The grieving Nuns attend the fainting fair,
With sad attention, and with pious care.
In vain their task; for through her vital frame,
A burning fever shot its livid flame;
No care avails her dying form to save,
She sinks untimely to an early grave.
From a tall cliff (beneath whose rugged brow
The tempest rag'd amid the waves below)
Her solemn dirge, sad sounding from the vale
And slowly wafted on the rising gale,
Young Henry heard, and starting at the sound,
He leapt impetuous in the vast profound!
The waves o'erwhelm him, and with horrid roar,
Dash his dead corpse against the sea-beat shore.

Be timely warn'd, ye generous youths, nor feel
The dread effects of superstitious zeal,
Avoid its rocks.  But if by fortune hurl'd
Amid the vices of a wretched world,
Be truly good, in spite of erring fools,
Whom vice allures, and dissipation rules.
Oh learn what charms from conscious virtue flow,
Which guilt ne'er feels nor guilty wretches know.
Seek honor's path, like virtuous Cato great,
A godlike hero in a falling state.
Like his, thy fame above the clouds may soar,
And reign immortal, when thou art no more!
Bright as the stars, or as the sun sublime,
Unhurt by age, and unobscur'd by time!
