PART I.
Borne on the winds or Heaven, how sweet the sigh
That gently breathes from lips of Piety.
Not odours burnt amidst the funeral pyre,
Nor incense wafted from the altar's fire,
So sweet an offering makes the shrines above,
As that mild breath wafts to the throne of Love.
And purer far than Zephyr's first embrace,
When morning streaks the dawn with orient grace,
Is the soft lucid tear, by Virtue shed,
In pity o'er the mourner's drooping head.
These, when a thousand transient joys are o'er,
Charm in perspective Memory's silent hour,
And gild the close of that eventual day,
No sun shall cheer with morn's reviving ray.

Oh!  who through wilds where Sin hath strewn her flowers
Would idly stray, or slumber in the bowers,
Regardless of the wily crested snake,
That gleams half hid beneath each verdant brake,
When Virtue's paths invite them to repose,
'Mid safe retreats, where every flow'ret blows,
Of perfume sweet, and hues of choicest die,
That can delight the sense, or charm the eye?

Daughter of Heaven!  fair Piety, descend,
And o'er the Muse thy gentle spirit bend;.
Within her breast, thy sacred influence pour,
And teach her hopes beyond this earth to soar.
Here, Hope is fleeting visionary, vain,
A soothing prelude to a scene of pain;
A phantom beam, which meets the admiring eye,
And, when pursued, wings to its native sky.
But, heavenly Piety!  'tis thine to cheer,
With many a prospect fair, the wanderer here:
Thine the delights, which Innocence bestows,
The lovely stream, whence heartfelt pleasure flows.
No joys tumultuous swell its crystal tide,
But calm and clear the peaceful waters glide;
And Heaven portrayed upon its breast we see,
The transcript of its source, Divinity.
In the pure stream thou lov'st thy hands to lave,
And Virtue's votaries seek the silvery wave;
Where, as reflected in a mirror's, face,
The tranquil source of Happiness they trace.
'Tis thine, when silent Grief the bosom wrings,
And cold neglect with bitter anguish stings,
To soothe the Mourner's melancholy hour,
And yield a solace passing Friendship's power:
To arm the bosom 'gainst the woes which spring,
In quick succession, from Time's rapid wing;
And point to realms, where, every trial past,
The weary shall repose in peace at last.

When Pain, his iron hand bath rudely pressed,
And Want sits brooding on the poor man's breast,
'Tis thou alone can'st shield him from Despair,
And change his groans to penitence and prayer:
O'er his deep anguish hang with healing wing,
And dreams of Hope, with resignation bring.

Lo!  where thy handmaid train descending form,
A bow of promise thwart life's passing storm:
See Faith, and Hope, and Charity, divine,
To bless mankind, united charms combine.
By them inspired, the Missionary goes,
Nor heeds the desert sands, nor mountain snows;
Braves the rude Winds, which sweep the stormy
Or burning climes explores with tranquil soul;
On Faith's broad pinions rests his fervid eye,
And smiling Hope inspires his trembling sigh:
Mark, where he treads the solitary wild,
And Heaven, alone, sees her devoted child.
Clear from the desert rock the waters flow,
And fertile vales adorn the wastes below;
The peopled wilderness begins to smile,
And Peace and Plenty bless the land the while;
Still, with the Christian's name, the arts appear,
And useful labour reaps the bending ear.
Around him now a happy people rise,
Who love the reverend sire, that made them wise;
And in meek order bend their quiet way,
To learn their duty, on the sabbath day.
Say, what induced the wanderer to roam,
To leave his Country, Friends, and native home?

'Twas Charity, at thy divine behest
He sought, 'mong foreign climes, a place of rest:
'Twas thou who bad'st him bear the balm which heals,
And sacred source of light and life reveals,
To those who dwelt in darkness, which no sun,
No God of Peace, and Love e'er beamed upon.

When first Augustine, from Italia's shore,
The Christian standard to Britannia bore,
The land of Freedom hailed the dawning day,
And Superstition fled, with night, away.
Around the olive branch, it shade extends,
And meek-eyed Mercy on the plain descends.
The Druid claims no more the shady grove,
Where altars rise to God, the God of Love.
No blood stained offering on his shrine appears;
The gift most welcome there &mdash; repentant tears.
But, long the mystic shade of learning veiled
The sacred volume, and its light curtailed;
Till reverend Bede, with holy zeal inspired,
And fervent soul, which christian ardour fired,
Removed the ponderous robe Religion wore,
And clothed her in Britannia's simple lore.
His work complete, the enraptured sage expired,
The end accomplished, which his life desired.

From Charity, a thousand bounteous streams
Gush o'er the land, enlivened by her beams;
Through all the dark retreats of Sorrow pour,
And spoil Adversity of half his power:
E'en through the dungeon's gloom her bounty steals,
Where Howard's name, each echoing vault reveals,
The Captive's guardians Angel, who above,
Now smiling views unfold the work of Love.
Lo!  from the Convict's solitary room
Malignant damps have fled, and Death's chill gloom
The prison vibrates to the cheerful voice,
Of useful labour, and her cells rejoice.
Instruction mingles with the generous plan,
And Youth reclaimed, shines forth the virtuous Man.
Auspicious age!  when Virtue hails afar
The radiant splendours of her morning star,
Which ushers to the world, a brighter day,
Than earth's proud orb, e'er viewed with dazzling ray.
Oh Piety!  thou source of good below,
And highest bliss seraphic natures know;
Still spread, refulgent, thy celestial wing,
And shelter on thy shrine, each offering
Philanthropy, with hallowed seal hath strown,
And love which beams o'er all, from zone to zone,
Snatch from oblivion every honoured name,
To shine beyond the wreck of earthly Fame.
A Reynolds, reverend in years, whose wealth
Flowed round the land, dispensing joy and health;
Like some pure fount, whose lucid water flows,
Hid 'neath the verdure which around it grows.
And Fry's loved name, whose melody is given,
To call the wanderers to the fold of Heaven:
Whose soul's benevolence glows unconfined,
Embracing in its zeal all human kind;
And many a name that dear to Virtue, will
Float on the ear of loved remembrance still.

Thine the calm fortitude, which meets resigned,
The keenest pangs that rack the tortured Mind&mdash;
When, savage Mary, with her hands imbrued,
In Christian gore, unsated yet with blood,
Shed o'er the cruel tyrant's bated reign,
A deeper odium, and more lasting stain:
With heart of adamant, relentless hurled
Truth, Love, and Beauty, from a shuddering world.
Oh!  could not guileless Innoeence arrest
One thought of pity in that stony breast?
For, sure if Nature's purple current flowed
True to the throb of feeling Heaven bestowed,
Youth had not pleaded at that fin in vain,
And Guildford long had bleat his faithful Jane.
In that dread hour, to Piety consigned,
No guilty fears distracted either mind;
Hope sweetly pointed to a happier clime,
Where, snatched beyond the tyranny of Time,
In blest reunion met, to part no more,
Their gentle spirits should together soar.
"Oh!  'tis but for a moment that we part,
Thou dearer than the life stream in my, heart,
My husband!  seek, ah!  seek no more, to see
The fatal source of so much misery:
'Twill but unfix the purpose of thy soul,
And through each breast a flood of anguish roll!"
Thus spoke the heroic fair, and bowed, resigned;
No earthly terrors shook her sainted mind:
Pale Superstition waved his torch in vain,
And bigot Zeal, that clanks the Captive's chain.
Firm, undismayed, amidst a host of foes,
Meek as a lamb, that to the slaughter goes,
On the harsh block her lovely neck reclined,
And gave to heavenly joys, her spotless mind.

Triumphant Piety!  'twas thine to soar,
Beyond frail Nature in that dreadful hour;
When Latimer, and Ridley dear to Fame,
And Cranmer, braved serene, the fiery flame.
Their martyred dust, on thy blest altar strewn,
Waits the loud trump &mdash; shall hail the awful morn;
When Justice from her throne of flaming light,
Shall hurl the guilty to eternal night.

Celestial maid!  When Time's last sand is run,
Thy tide of glory has but them begun;
When Nature prone from her centre driven,
And darkness veils the smiling face of Heaven,
Thou, still, beyond the wreck of worlds shalt soar,
And Nature's God, in bliss supreme adore.
Oh!  hope ecstatic!  beaming through the gloom
Which wraps the awful mysteries of the tomb;
The welcome beacon on a friendly coast,
When the lorn mariner deems his vessel lost:
Through every change of Fate's uncertain will,
Thou art the day-star of our prospect still.

How wretched they no sacred promise cheers,
Who walk n darkness through this rule of tears;
And see beyond, no haven of repose
To anchor, when the floods around them close.
Oh!  would such desolated spirits turn,
And drink, Repentance, from thy golden urn;
With will submissive, seek a Saviour's shrine,
And bend beneath his chastening hand divine:
The unpeopled wilds of Hope for them should smile,
And a rich harvest yet reward their toil.

Who would risk Heaven's immortal bliss, to be
The boasted slave of proud Philosophy?
If such be called, that limits to a span,
The vaunted power of earth great monarch, Man!
Still let fair Nature's laws lie hid in night,&mdash;
Shall Reason, with her spark of glow-worm light,
Trace the stupendous fabric God has formed,
And with a master's bounteous hand adorned?
Wisdom, with eye intent upon the whole,
Waits till the Maker shall his laws unrol.
Frail Reason, like the orb of visual ray,
Would shrink to meet so bright a flood of day;
And, wounded by the glory, find, too late,
'Tis vain to soar beyond our feeble state
As well might earthly torch seek to illume
The long continued night of polar gloom,
When, at the Solstice, Phoebus reins his steed,
Nor onward urges with his wonted speed.
As well might 'tempt to melt the snowy veil,
Which clothes Chimb'rano in his shining mail,
As trace the mighty hand which guides, unseen,
The vast Creation as one great machine.
A thousand hidden springs continual play,
A thousand wheels for ever locked from day;
And he who seeks the barrier to remove,
Must fruitless find his idle labour prove:
Enough for man, the bright effect to see,
And feel that Nature's law is harmony.

Thou power divine!  that round the eternal throne&mdash;
Ere Time his flight began, effulgent shone;
And when his infant wings first hailed the ray,
That woke in Eden's bowers the blissful day
Of Nature's rest, &mdash; with the glad sabbath came,
And upon earth diffused thy heavenly flame.
Oh!  might thy influence grasp the frozen bound,
Which wraps the confines of the deeps profound;
Sway every heart, and rule in every clime,
Our guardian angel through the walks of tine.
Blest should we be, and Discord from the plain
Would vanish, to his native depths again;
Peace, Concord, Love, and all the smiling band
Of sister graces, hail the happy laid:
While Piety, thy sweet seraphic voice,
Would, through all Natures boundaries, rejoice;
And pour the tributary meed of praise,
To the great Author of creation's maze.

Thou fly'st the gory field of hostile war,
Borne on the shining car of peace, afar,
To woody vales; where Nature revels free,
Chanting he sacred hymn of Liberty.
There bloom thy native flowers &mdash; sweet Peace; and there
The sighing breezes waft thy natal air:
No shouts of battle from thy, hills arise,
No dying groans, or wounded captive's cries;
But smiling Plenty crowns the labourer's toil,
And fertile Nature loves the genial soil.
In such seclusion, with a Friend beloved,
Far from the wily snores of Vice removed,
How calm would glide the tenor of our days,
How brightly set our sun's declining rays.

When, from the blushing east, the golden morn,
Strews with her glittering pearls the scented thorn,
And every verdant bough, and perfumed flower,
With richer sweets repays the sparkling shower;
How dear to wander through the leafy grove,
And list' the tuneful melody of love;
Smile on Creation's renovated bloom,
Then pause to think, how soon 'twill fade in gloom.
Pursue the moral through the various chain
Of Nature's bright, but transitory, reign;
And from the breathing picture, raptured trace,
The Master's touch portrayed in every grace;
Impressed upon his work with stamp divine,
Through countless ages still renewed to shine.

How wanting wisdom, they who fondly, turn
To joys of earth, &mdash; nor from experience learn
That satisfaction rests not here below,
Where, every hope indulged, entails a woe.
He, who, in goodness infinite, has given
The glorious prize to win, eternal Heaven,
Placed man on earth, to prove him, and refine,
And fit him through eternity to shine.
Not to become an animated clod,
Bound to the soil, regardless of his God;
But, bursting from his tenement of clay,
To soar, a seraph, in the realms of day.

Thrice happy they, in childhood's blissful hours,
Who bend to Virtue's sway their opening powers;
In whose young hearts the cherished seeds are sown,
Whose shoots, fair Piety, shall hail her own.
Oh!  prize your privilege, ye favoured youth,
Who, trained and fostered in the walks of Truth,
Find flow'rets bloom, where duty's path appears,
And can, from habit, spurn the rising tares.
Deep rooted in your breasts, may no rude storm,
Truth's rising stem, or opening leaves, deform;
But, cherished there, to flourish and expand,
With blooming verdure, grace a smiling land;
Till, in maturity, the ample fruit
Shall liberally crown the fostering root;
And form around its venerable age,
A verdant shelter's welcome foliage.

When all, who once were dear in youth's gay prime,
Have sunk beneath the ruthless scythe of Time,
And we are tottering on life's awful verge,
And our last years have wak'd their mournful dirge,
How welcome then Affection's filial hand,
To lend the aid our feeble steps demand.
How well repaid our kind paternal care,
From the young soil to weed out every tare;
To lead with suasive voice where Virtue charmed,
Or Vice, unmasked, the guileless breast alarmed;
That watched the first unfoldings of the soul,
And stamped Truth's lovely impress on the whole.

How all our youthful interests return,
And, mid Hope's dying embers, brightly burn.
When first emerging on life's busy stage,
We view a Son, the comfort of our age;
Or blooming Daughter, in whose form we trace
The soft developement of female grace;
With fond solicitude survey her o'er,
And heavenly guidance for her youth implore.
Hope whispers these; when on the bed of death
Will cheer with patient love our latest breath;
With soothing voice our sinking spirits raise,
And sweetly join in [ ] Redeemer's praise.
And when at last their filial hands have laid
The parent dust beneath sepulchral shade,
The tear of Piety will often shed,
To dew the memory of the hallowed dead;
Who now, from every earthly sorrow free,
Await to hail them in Eternity.

Ye troubled spirits, who, a prey to grief,
Look round and view no haven of relief;
On whom Fell disappointment's leaden hand
Hath rudely pressed; who, shipwrecked on the strand
Of Memory's gloomy coast, see every germ,
Once promised to adorn life's lingering term.
For you the muse would gladly light a path,
To guide you safely from Misfortune's wrath;
And pour a ray of sunshine through the gloom,
Which wraps in sombre shade your future doom.
Have ye once basked in Fortune's fickle smiles,
And did she snare you with her treacherous wiles;
Upon her syren voice did you rely,
And find her promise prove a specious lie?
Oh!  mourn not for a loss, which, e'en at best,
Is an uncertain good &mdash; by all confessed.

Think of His words, who said &mdash; that riches are,
To Haven's fair realms of bliss, a powerful bar;
A mortal arm may rend the rocky base,
And through the mountain's side a pathway trace;
May cleave Darien's giant belt and pour
Through the deep fissure, ocean's mighty roar.
But he atone, whose power creates the eye
To take in Heaven, and all yon worlds on high,
Can art display to thread a narrow round,
With a circumference larger than it bound:
Or, midst his hoarded wealth, the rich man's heart
Inspire with strength to choose the better part.
Then, grieve not, that an easier path for you
Is kindly marked, though strewed with baleful yew;
Better to tread where thorns and briars wound,
And safely walk at last on heavenly ground,&mdash;
Than for a while to bask in pleasure's bowers,
Fanned by her breath, and shaded 'mongst her flowers:
To feel the phantom ground beneath you slide,
And see wild desolation yawning wide
T' ingulph its victim; who, around in vain
Despairing looks for pleasure's vanished train;
A false delusion all that mocked his sight,
Shuddering, he sinks into eternal night.

Art thou Misfortune's solitary child
On whom Prosperity hath rarely smiled?&mdash;
Though pride and folly scorn thy humble name,
And cold distrust oft tinge thy cheek with shame,
Yet heed them not; a powerful Friend on high
Regards thy sorrows with a Father's eye:
He knows thy weakness, knows what thou can'st bear,
Beyond that bound, extends his hand to spare.
And when despondence through thy soul pervades,
And Grief around thee draws her ebon shades,
To Him thy tearful eye in suppliance raise,
And He will change thy sighs to notes of praise.
He loves the contrite and the broken heart,
And will His beams of heavenly joy impart;
Pour on thy spirit Resignation's balm,
And through thy breast diffuse a peaceful calm.
Oh!  little boots it which we suffer here,
The gilded pang, or Penury's chill tear,
All meet on earth Affliction's stormy blast&mdash;
'Tis Mercy's breath shall waft to heaven at last,
If true to guidance given, our course we steer,
From passion's shoals and treacherous breakers clear,
Nor sink beneath temptation's eddying surge,
Whose warring billows peal contentment's dirge.

When pensive contemplation leads the mind
To dwell 'mong ruins, Time hath left behind;
When pausing o'er the fate of man, we turn,
And view him mouldering in the silent urn,
Who can forbear to heave the mournful sigh,
Or stern repress the tear which dims his eye?
What bosom warms not with the friendly glow
Which counts a Brother in each child of woe?
All recollections of the great, then seem
Like phantom shades, which haunt the midnight dream.
We see the monarch humbled in the dust,
Mid 'view proud wealth robbed of his golden trust:
Ambition here, grasps but the narrow bed,
Where Poverty, alike, reclines his head.
And here the young, the gay, the fair are laid,
With Want and foul Disease in Death's cold shade:
Distinctions all, are buried in the tomb,
Age, sex, condition, mingle in one doom.
Then, where the boast displayed, by wealth and fame?
Where the proud empty title of a name?
Where all that charms on earth the vacant mind?
Left by the dead &mdash; for ever left behind.
But he who builds his hopes beyond the skies,
Receives from Death the wings on which to rise
And gain his long sought treasure, and far more
Than human heart can wish, or thought explore.
When this fair world, and all you orbs of light
Drop from the ether to oblivious night,
His spirit soaring to its home above,
Shall there for ever dwell in Peace and Love.

PART II.
When Heaven's great architect, surveyed around
Creation perfect to its farthest bound;
When day's bright orb his radiant circuit ran,
And the mild Queen of night her course began;
When, each revolving planet tracked its sphere,
And Heaven's bright girdle spanned the rolling year.
When Man erect, his Maker's image stood
Lord of the peopled land, and teeming flood,
Creative goodness bade the Sabbath dawn,
And Peace reposed on Eden's flowery lawn.

Blest holiday of nature on thy morn
No sounds of labour with the breeze are borne;
No plough boy whistling to his toil repairs,
Nor busy hum proclaims the morning's care;
No blacksmith's anvil vibrates through the vale,
Nor lusty arm uprears the ponderous flail.
Few are the rumbling wheels, whose thundering sound,
In heavy peals rolls o'er the trembling ground
No woodman's axe affrights the shady grove,
Where all is tuned to melody and love.

A ray of sunshine beams in every face,
Through every walk, a Sabbath's garb we trace;
E'en where the tangled brake invites the Muse
Some note of gladness on the gale pursues.
'Mid forest glooms where Sol has rarely strayed,
We hear the distant music pierce the glade;
The joyous peal to every bosom tells
Sweet recollection's of the village bells;
Where oft in youth, with heart elate and free,
We hailed the Sabbath's grateful, melody;
And to the lively cadence, loud and clear,
Oft lent a lingering and a pensive ear.

Dear recollections!  still to memory dear!
Time with few sweeter notes hath charmed my ear;
How many a year has told its silent round
Since first I paused to list the pleasing sound!
And ah!  how few, who then with me were gay,
Are near me now to smooth life's toilsome way.
Ye sacred ties of Nature!  where are ye?&mdash;
Are kindred bonds loosed in Eternity?&mdash;
Does no regret for loved ones left behind
E'er cloud the sunshine of an Angel's mind?
Or are ye now, as severed love would deem,
Still hovering near, and prompt the tender dream?
Oh!  if ye be, and blissful spirits prove
The power to guard on earth the friends they love;
My path from intercepting dangers clear,
And dissipate the clouds which gather near;
Within my breast the virtuous wish incite,
And lead me to the realms of endless light.

Child of the skies!  fair Piety!  to thee
We look for guidance o'er life's stormy sea;
Whatever ills our feeble bark assail,
Thou can'st' elude the fury of the gale;
And lead us to thy calm sequestered cell,
Where Peace, and heavenly Contemplation dwell.
They little dream, who tread the giddy round
Where Folly's wild fantastic joys abound,
What real bliss in thy domains we find,
What rapture, what serenity of mind!
No joys of sense &mdash; no luring phantoms there
Delude the wretch, or plunge him in despair;
But calm, delightful converse of the soul,
With Nature's God, inspirer of the whole!

Not the fierce joy that Moloch's children feel
When mangled victims writhe beneath his wheel;
Whose slaughtering car, drawn by infuriate hands,
With human gore distains fair India's sands.
Nor Kolloh's cry on Afric's dreary shore,
Mingling its note with the loud death yell's roar;
Nor rite of Moslem's prophet, round whose shrine
Rapine, and lust, and lawless power combine;
Whose Paradise, by eastern fancy drest,
Displays one scene of sort voluptuous rest:
Where dark-eyed Houris charm the lingering hours,
And odorous breezes fan the fragrant bowers.

No joys to these allied, no hopes impure
With warmth unhallowed Virtue's sons allure;
Their bliss in Heaven, beyond frail sense to soar,
Where Death and Sin can ne'er oppress them more.
In grateful adoration there to raise
The rapturous paean to JEHOVAH'S praise
There with the blest to dwell, where Friendship reigns,
And cold distrust no generous bosom pans;
Where all united live, and truly prove
How sweet the bonds of Brotherhood and Love.
There to converse with those, whose names on earth
Still shine mementos of unfading worth;
And, oh! &mdash; delightful thought! &mdash; free from the coil
Which binds us, like the earth-worm, to the soil;
Communion intellectual, high, refined
To hold with beings of etherial mind,&mdash;
Blest privilege!  and Virtue's large reward&mdash;
How far surpassing ought we here regard
As worthy our ambition to attain,
Our labour to acquire, or hope to gain!

Oh!  for a lyre dropped from that blest abode, 
To speak the unutterable love of God!
'Tis great beyond the power of earth to tell&mdash;
All Heaven should echo one seraphic swell!
Angels, on golden harps, loud anthems raise,
And mortal lip chant the Redeemer's praise;
Who, in amazing condescension, came
To rescue man from Death's tyrannic reign;
Bowed to the Tyrant's dart his honoured head,
While Day, affrghted, from the concave fled: &mdash;  
And trembling Nature groaned, to feel the doom
That, woke the sainted from their peaceful tomb;
Rent to its base his temples awful shade,
And all its unveiled mysteries displayed.
His power in every heart is now revealed&mdash;
From none his covenant of grace concealed;
There veiled in peace, the sacred ark may rest&mdash;
His fairest temple, every Christian's breast.

With thee to guide, to counsel, and attend,
We need, fair Piety, no earthly friend;
Thy paths, by wisdom planned, are safe and sure,
And they who tread them are from ill secure.
No fears which haunt the guilty, and intrude
Unwelcome guests upon their solitude,
Are thine; the tranquil eye, and brow serene,
Proclaim that all is smiling peace within.
In thy abodes no harsh restraints conspire
To check the glow of intellectual fire;
The mind illum'd by thee, with clearer eye,
Glances from earth to range the boundless sky;
Discerns, with quicker sight, the studied guile
Of sophist speculation's artful wile,
And culls with nicer care, from Truth's rich mine,
The gold, undazzled by the tinsel's shine.

With thee to rove through academic bowers,
Select the clustering fruit and cull the flowers,
Quaff the rich draught from Wisdom's fount that flows,
And breathe the strain where sacred ardour glows,
Be still the Muses' bliss; thy presence, e'en
On mount Parnassian, consecrates the scene.
With Milton track the distance of the sphere,
And list to Angel voices hovering near;
Or turn to where the moral Sage is heard,
And ponder o'er each deep impressive word;
High on his intellectual pinion soar, 
And ramble every field of reason o'er:
Whose genius, like the torrent's whelming force,
Swept every barrier in its giant course.
Oft may'st thou still to Olney's shades repair,
Where thy own Cowper breathed his mournful prayer;
Snatch from despondence every plaintive sigh,
And waft an offering to his native sky.
Through all the paths of science, thy fair hand
Strews a rich garland to adorn the land;
And, consecrate to thee, our talents shine,
With less of earthly ray, than light divine.
Unhallowed by thy smiles, an Angel's mind
Would vainly wander, erring, feeble, blind;
And human learning is but subtle lore
That more bewilders, as we ponder more:&mdash;
An Ignis-fatuus glancing through the night,
That never leads the wandering traveller right;
While Wisdom, from above, emits a ray
Shall safely guide him to the realms of day;
Shine on his path through wilds of doubt and gloom,
The fire by night, the hovering cloud by noon;
That, when he droops, his fainting spirit cheers&mdash;
This checks the idle mirth that Folly wears.

When Spring, mild, breathing o'er the landscape roves,
And vernal music warbles through the groves;
When Sol's bright chariot climbs the azure sky,
And his warm beams reflect their radiant die,
Nature once more proclaims her blissful reign,
And annually blooms in youth again.
While man pronounced his Maker's image, here
Views no returning spring to life's dull year;
The ray obscured, which lights his transient day,
To other realms he wings his viewless way.

Shall he, then, formed Eternal bliss to gain,
Still drag content on earth a captive's chain?
Where Sin and Death their iron sceptre wield&mdash;
His heart supine, their easy conquest yield?
Nought here a soul immortal can suffice&mdash;
We tread in pain the flowery paths of vice;
The blooming rose its thorny stem conceals,
But pluck the flower, and pain its sting reveals.
Too true the fabled gift, (of Jove averred,)
Pandora's box, on Man by Heaven conferred;
With life bestowed, the various evils rise,
And Hope beyond still points to brighter skies.

Why does the future still our bliss contain?
And why the present marked a scene of pain?
To prove that man is but a traveller here,
And that he journeys to some happier sphere;
No boon we find without its purpose given,
And Hope directs our wandering steps to Heaven.

Why all the waste of mind on man bestowed
If formed alone for this terrene abode?
Why not, of present ease and food possessed,
Like other creatures, in contentment rest;
Like them endowed with powers that might suffice
His natural wants, nor lead astray to vice?
But if we view him, formed for nobler ends,
The link in Nature's chain, where mind with matter blends,
How may we marvel, that he trifles here,
As if earth were his sole eternal sphere.

Oh!  where, when mingled with its native dust,
His earthly frame resigns its sacred trust;
Flits the immortal, immaterial ray,
That here illumed his cold insensate clay?
It cannot slumber in his earthy bed,
Or mingle with the ashes of the dead.
Our reason this denies, but why explore
The void, where Reason lights our path no more;
Where deep Humility and Reverence seem
The guardian spirits of the slumberer's dream;
Of which, e'en revelation from above,
Imparts no more than may our doubts remove?
Better to wait, resigned, the awful change,
When our freed spirits shall unfettered range
The vast domains of intellectual space,
And the designs of heavenly Wisdom trace;
Securing, by our virtuous lives, a seat,
Where the Redeemed, by God's appointment, meet.

Friend of the wretch!  whose every earthly stay
Grim Death, with outstretched arm hath rent away;
Who hovering on the awful verge of fate,
Views his days hastening to their latest date;
But dares not on the future cast his eye,
And from the past, in vain essays to fly;
Who, conscience smit, bow's to Conviction's rod,
And trembles in the presence of his God.
Friend e'en of him, thy counsels oft relieve,
And bring from guilt and death a kind reprieve:
From his torn heart, thou lov'st the sigh to bear
Where Mercy glad, records the sinners prayer;
And with repentance, pour the healing balm
Can bid the tempest troubled breast be calm.

Lo!  in his cell the wretched convict laid,
To Death ignoble, by his crimes betrayed;
Dark lowers his brow, and wild his glare
Sullen resolve, &mdash; the offspring of Despair
Reigns in his soul, the desolate abode
Of misery and sin, lift's heaviest load.
What now can him avail, and from his head
Avert the bursting storm by Justice sped?
What shield him from the irrevocable doom,
Pronounced the fate of guilt, beyond the tomb?
Deluded man!  hast thou no soul to save?
No part that Sin can sting beyond the grave?
Thou hast!  and yet for thee 'tis not too late
To 'scape the horrors of impending fate:
One last retreat remains, indulgent Heaven,
One ray of hope hath yet in mercy given!
And while the pangs of guilt, terrific roll
Their train of horrors through thy tortured soul;
While in thy breast, the worm that never dies,
Gnaws with remorseless, heartfelt agonies,
For thee Repentance opens still the gate
Where Peace and Mercy thy arrival wait;
To guide thy feet where streams of goodness flow&mdash;
Can wish from all thy guilt and all thy woe.
Heaven wills not that one perish, but that all
Obey, repentant, the Redeemer's call;
Nor think, for thee too late, the eleventh hour
Bears witness to his blest atoning power.

Not all the pleasures of this earthly sphere,
If we possessed them unalloyed whilst here,
And our full years were lengthened thrice the span,
By Heaven declared the allotted date of man;
Would weigh a grain, if in the scale of bliss,
Balanced against Eternal happiness;
But with alloy so tempered oft they see
To cheat possession and appear a dream,
Uncertain are at best, still on the wing,
And many a pain and disappointment bring.
What folly then, on these to fix the heart,
Life so precarious that an hour may part.

Who that have loved, and have not mourned some tie,
Once dear as life, by Time swept rudely by?
Some Parent severed from our early years,
Whose dear remembrance claims our filial tears?
A brother, loved companion of our youth,
Or sister, guileless as the breast of truth?
Some faithful friend, whose generous bosom glowed,
With every virtue Heaven hath here bestowed?
Or yet, perhaps, than these a tenderer charm,
Within our breasts awoke the soft alarm.
Perhaps we loved so fondly none can tell,
And yet have bid our love a last farewell.
Long years of tender intercourse enjoyed,
Leave but within the breast a deeper void,
And hearts impressed too fondly with the past,
Feel doubt and gloom their future hours o'ercast,
Remembrance weeping, views the vanished bliss,
Still clinging to the wreck of happiness?
Who, thus bereaved, but would with rapture tread,
The dreariest wilds that to such lost ones led;
And count the dangers of the journey light,
That blest them with their loved companion's sight?
And does not Piety, our guide through time,
Direct our wanderings to that blissful clime,
Where happy spirits, freed from earthly care,
Rejoin each other, in blest union, there?

What power, save Piety, can nerve the mind
To meet the various ills of Fate, resigned,
With confidence on God still to rely,
Though every earthly friend should from them fly,
And in His chastenings view a Father's care,
Who wounds in mercy, wounds that He may spare?
What is the Stoic's fortitude to this?
The calm of stagnant waters, Pride's abyss.
What all Philosophy can teach mankind?
Delusive errors, which their reason blind.
And all reliance placed beneath the skies,
Like cloudy forms shall vanish from their eyes.

Ask yon dejected man, who long has toiled
Up the steep path of Science, seldom foiled;
Ask him if ought he there discerned, hath power
To snatch from grief and pain one lingering hour:
Ah, no!  his quick reply "I dare not now
To study trust this worn-bewildered brow;
E'en from myself I would my thoughts conceal,
There is no comfort in what they reveal.
Reason half totters in my feeble brain&mdash;
Too deeply have I thought, alas!  in vain:&mdash;
You speak of Piety, oh!  tell me how
One that ne'er prayed, may learn to do so now?
Fain would I try, ought to assuage my grief;
And yield what medicine seeks in vain &mdash; relief."

Victim of erring reason!  can'st thou cease
To rest on human aid thy hopes of peace,
And like a child bereaved of self, appear
In His dread presence, who a sigh can hear?
All words are vain to Him, who views the mind,
Nor to one thought or weak endeavour blind;
Thy very wish to rest on Him for aid,
Shall be, ere long, with gathering strength repaid;
And language such suits thy wants, will He
Impart, in goodness infinite, to thee.

Youths, who in pleasure's rosy fetters, stray,
And yield to Mirth and Joy the festive day;
Round whom the laughing hours, on silken wing,
A thousand glowing dreams of rapture fling;
Whose morn of life hath dawned without a cloud,
And whose fair prospect yet no sorrows shroud;
Trust not the gay delusion &mdash; Hope's soft voice
Oft bids, the wretch, on ruin's brink, rejoice:
And, oft the summer's calm forebodes a storm
Shall soon the smiling face of heaven deform;
And the dread Thunderer through the sultry skies,
Hurl the red bolt, and bid the whirlwind rise.
Deceitful here the calm of happiness&mdash;
Grief seeks his victims 'mongst the bowers of bliss;
Where, as in bland repose, they gaily rest,
He aims his deadliest weapon at their breast.
Place not your hopes on earth, confide in Heaven,
The tempest oft the sheltering oak hath riven;
Life hath its elements, and they unbind
Sorrow, Despair, and Death, to prove mankind;&mdash;
Unwelcome harbingers of pain, yet bring
A healing virtue in their keenest sting,
When with submissive deference we bow
To Him who wisely rules events below.

Lo!  where Oppression rears his giant form,
On Indian shores, where sweeps the Atlantic storm:
Mark!  from his lash what groans of anguish rise,
What cries of sorrow vibrate through the skies:
What forms are those that quiver 'neath his rod,
Shrink from his presence, and obey his nod?
Afric's unhappy sons!  compelled to roam
In hateful bondage, from their native home;
Scourged like the brute, which spurns its master's will,
Degraded, wronged, abused, but human still!
How looks the God of Heaven from above
Upon these sable children of His love?&mdash;
Regards He not their cry, sees not their tear,
Their bitter plaints, their sighs, will He not hear?
Assuredly He will, an in that scroll
Which the last awful day shall view unrol,
Records them all &mdash; then, whose the deeper stain,
The slave's who wore, or his who forged the chain?

How beautiful!  doth, Piety appear,
Inspiring peace, and hope &mdash; but fairest here
She seems, where Slavery reigns,
And Death alone can end the negroe's pains:
What consolation, when his task is oer,
To feel that God is his, and Him adore.

Lives there a being, in he breast no ray
Hath ever dawned, pure from the source of day,
Whose spirit hath not trembled in it beam,
And felt with Angel's bliss, the heavenly gleam?
An emanation from, that fountain's source,
Whose stream is glorious, as diffused its course.
Oh!  can it be, God hath created one
He hath not visited, and smiled upon?
And who that ever felt His presence burn
Within his heart, but wished its blest return?

'Tis this which makes the Christian's journey light,
He walks rejoicing in his Saviour's sight;
And though around him scorn and danger rise,
His faithful steps press onward to the skies.
'Tis this Inspires him with the love of truth,
And shields from ill the unwary breast of youth;
'Tis this, when reft of every hope beside,
Hath still supported till the martyr died.

Oh Piety!  pure are thy pleasures, pure
As they are fadeless, ever to endure!
The mind clothed in thy simple majesty,
May smile at fortune, and her frowns defy;
A world within itself, it moves serene
Through the wild tumults of earth's chequered scene:
Like yon mild orb, which through the nightly sky,
Still shining rolls, though clouds around her fly;
That deepest glooms but veil her face awhile,
When past, once more we view her heavenly smile.
