Amid Siberian wastes and trackless ways,
The cossack, Markoff, pass'd his happy days;
No rapturous hope or rankling care he knew,
His means were simple, as his wants were few.
When summer cloth'd the hill and deck'd the plain,
He wisely thought of winter's cheerless reign;
And when the wintry snows the scene o'ercast,
Look'd on to summer and endured the blast.
Thus life roll'd on, and thus he sooth'd his breast,
Till restless thoughts and vain desires arose
To break his calm and long-enjoy'd repose.
Beside his hut the musing cossack stood
And listen'd to the sound of neighbouring wood
Whose slow and solemn murmurs fill'd his ear
Through all the changeful seasons of the year.
The dark Uralian hills before him rose,
The wind of autumn now impetuous blows:
Dreary the view!  the frost o'erspread the ground,
And the loud brook with fetters now is bound.
He mark'd the clouds from Arctic mountains roll'd,
He call'd to mind the tale of traveller bold;
He thought of distant scenes, of realms unknown
Where through all ages, tempests held their throne
Sounding their ceaseless wrath, whose awful reign
No moral foot had ever dar'd profane.
The desperate resolve is made!  He cried,
"These feet shall dare yon wilds, whate'er betide;
These eyes explore the extent yon regions spread
Where the young north-wind dwells, the storm is bred.
I, who in caves of ice have oft reclined,
And braced my sinews in the fiercest wind;
May smile at danger!  dangers but invite,
And storms and tempests were my first delight.
But if no bound appear, and as I go,
Wild rocks increase, and mountains hid in snow,
On all sides round more gloomy wastes prevail,
And as I journey bleaker winds assail;
Still, shall I learn to brave the polar storm,
And gaze on Nature in her rudest form."

Through the thick mists no cheering sunbeams shone;
His sledge prepared, his winter coat put on,
Heedless, he cried, "Adieu!" and urged his deer;&mdash;
The mother and her children dropt the tear!

Now the bold cossack many a hill had past,
Tho' each appear'd more threat'ning than the last;
While all before, far as his eye could strain,
Seem'd ruin's ancient unexplored domain.

With heart too proud to temporize with fear,
The hardy Markoff pass'd the mountains drear;
He cross'd each distant summit, but in vain;
Beyond them still, bounding his utmost sight,
Hills rise o'er hills clad in eternal white:
And now he came where not a guide was nigh,
Save (mid the valley bare or crag on high
From certain death the wanderer's step to warn)
Some solitary pine by tempests shorn.
He stood, and mark'd the desolation wide;
His "mute companions" tremble by his side!
And while he strives the chilling blast to bear,
And hears the whirlwind thund'ring thro' the air;
Fear shakes his frame, he dreads his coming fate,
He knows his error, but, alas, too late!
With resolution warring with dismay,
Back he returns to trace his devious way;
But, now the scene seems wilder than before,
The smoke-frosts rise, the cracking Iceburgs roar!
Weary, the patient deer their path pursue,
Where never man abode, or herbage grew.
The prospect round appear'd one yawning grave,
And mid each pause the fitful tempest gave,
No howl from starving wolf invades his ear,
To soothe him with the thought that &mdash; life is near.

Now thicker darkness gather'd o'er his head;
Now anguish rose, till hope itself was fled;
Despair's impenetrable mists arise!
Frozen in death, each beast beside him lies.
From succour far, chain'd to the icy ground
The wilder'd cossack sorrowing looks around;
Longs on the clouds that southward take their flight
To seek again his dwelling of delight;
"Ah vain desire!" he cries, "no more mine eye
Shall mark that calm abode and tranquil sky;
The wrathful elements, around me rave;
No friend to comfort me, no power to save!
Why did I seek mid wilds like these to stray?
And why disdain the perils of the way?
My children now shall mourn, no father near!
My wife shall drop the unavailing tear!
Cold chills of death creep through my shivering form!
Markoff, thy hour is come!  Thou pitiless storm,
Spare me one moment!  keep thy wrath above!
'Tis hard to die, far from the friends we love!"
Once more he thought upon his home, and sigh'd!
Once more he cast a look on every side!

What forms are those which through the plain below,
Speed undiverted, scatt'ring wide the snow?
It is a band of sable hunters, bold;
Rise!  Markoff, rise!  shout, ere thy heart be cold!
He calls!  they heed him not!  more loud he calls!
They hear a voice!  the sound each breast appals!
They pause!  they look around!  they see his face!
They haste the lonely wand'rer to embrace!
Safe in their sledge he seeks his native vale,
And warns each venturous traveller by his tale.
