The Sun's bright orb retiring dimly glares,
In strict compliance with the law of pow'r,
Each prisoner to his cheerless roof repairs,
And I in thought amuse the vacant hour.

Now sable night o'er all her mantle throws,
And solemn silence reigns throughout the yard,
Save where yon vet'ran to his station goes,
A poor disabled solitary guard.

Save that from yonder room in mournful strains,
With melancholy tone and plaintive air,
Some tender father to the night complains,
Of children left without a parent's care.

Within these ramparts, by fam'd Vauban made,
Where hapless youths for freedom learn to weep,
On beds of humble straw till morning laid,
The brave and dauntless sons of Neptune sleep.

The pilot, steering with his wonted skill,
The song the seaman sings who heaves the lead,
The calls of duty, or the pipe's long trill,
No more must rouse them from their lowly bed.

For them no more the joys of home return,
Or social friends their welcome tables keep;
No grateful sight now bids their bosoms burn,
Of Britain's isle emerging from the deep.

Oft have they been in glorious triumph found,
O'er naval force of hostile pow'rs combin'd,
And oft the brows of gallant chiefs have bound,
With myrtles green, 'midst rosy wreaths entwin'd.

Oh let not grandeur, with contemptuous smile,
Mock their sad fate and destiny severe,
Nor pleasure's votaries in fair Albion's isle,
Cast on these captives a disdainful sneer.

The potent monarch with the splendid throng,
And those whom buxom health adorns with bloom,
To death's stern mandate must attend ere long,
And sink to prison in the silent tomb.

Nor you, ye great, impute the fault to those
Who in this realm high posts of honour share,
Nor on the brave the gates of pity close,
But misery's chain to break first nobly dare.

Say, after toils of war, and battles gain'd,
With trophies rais'd by them to Britain's fame,
Can you, to steer the helm of state ordain'd,
Stamp on neglect like this a generous name.

Perhaps in "durance vile" here may be plac'd
Some heart susceptive of poetic fire,
Hands which the sword of Duncan might have grac'd,
Or tun'd like Falconer the living lyre.

But science on their birth refused to smile,
Nor gave the instructive volume to their sight,
Their lives were destined to perpetual toil,
Unseen the rays of intellectual light.

Full many a song the tuneful bird of night
Warbles unheard amid some lonely place;
Full many a sun, of dazzling lustre bright,
Is lost in distance in the boundless space.

Some generous Howard, who with godlike zeal,
Rov'd o'er the world to set the pris'ner free,
May here the horrors of confinement feel,
Nor e'er again his home or country see.

Some gallant Nelson here unknown may rest,
In cells ungenial lost, his soul of fire,
His mind of vigour and that dauntless breast,
Danger could ne'er appal, or labour tire.

From lords and commons to receive applause,
O'er fleets combined assume the high command,
To save their country or protect its laws,
And in historic page for ever stand.

Their lot forbids; nor yet alone confines
Their useful virtues, but denies the pow'r
By unjust wars whole millions to consign
To death or mis'ry in a fatal hour.

Far from ambitious Alpine hills they rove,
Thro' life's low valley modestly they go,
Nor projects form to climb the heights above,
But live obscurely in the vale below.

Our fate, oh England!  will thine annals stain,
And fill with tears the sympathetic eye
Of gentle pity, who will not refrain
To pay for these the tribute of a sigh.

For who, imprison'd in this gloomy place,
The charming thoughts of freedom ere resign'd,
Felt not an anxious wish to see the face
Of some fair maid in Britain left behind.

Or to grief and gaol-disease a prey,
By ev'ry pleasing hope not quite forsook,
Can the stern tyrant Death's approach survey,
Nor cast on home one longing, ling'ring look.

Then liberty, thou goddess of the isle,
Whom Britain's sons with fervency adore,
Deign on our pray'rs propitiously to smile,
And quickly waft us to our native shore.

For thee, whose heart for others oft has bled,
And shar'd thyself the tale thou dost relate,
If to Arras by sportive fortune led,
Some friend to freedom should inquire thy fate.

Perchance some aged person may reply,
"Oft have we seen him when with colors clear,
The rosy morn had painted bright yon sky,
With beaver brown and thread-bare coat appear.

"Within those walls, now mould'ring to decay,
Rais'd on the rampart o'er the portal gate,
With learning's votive youths he pass'd the day,
And por'd upon some book till evening late.

"Then homeward to yon room he would repair,
And on the bed his listless length would stretch,
Absorb'd in sorrow and in deep despair,
His home or country ne'er again to reach."

And much I fear he'll shake his head and say,
"One morn we miss'd him at th' accustom'd hour,
Nor in the busy school was he that day,
Nor seen at eve to make his lonely tour.

"Next day in order slow without a hearse,
Straight thro' the Paris gate we saw him borne,
Near yon high mount where stand the glitt'ring cross,
His sad remains to their long home are gone."

EPITAPH.
Here rests his head upon the lap of earth,
A youth whom fortune had, with cruel sport,
Made her diversion from his humble birth,
'Till Death at last his thread of life cut short.

To misery's offspring or the child of want,
His arms were open and his heart alive,
But penury ordain'd his purse so scant,
A sigh or tear was all he had to give.

No other virtue in him seek to find,
Or the remembrance of his faults be made,
Nor let stern censure with a voice unkind,
Disturb the quiet of his peaceful shade.
