Tho' oft in life the virtuous suffer wrong,
And sink unheeded by the passing throng,
Yet one there lives, in mystic clouds inroll'd,
Who kindly listens, to each woe that's told.

On Bodnam plain, a place for cyder fam'd,
A knight there lived, and Trypho was he nam'd,
By money solely was his worship sway'd,
Unaw'd he liv'd, and seem'd of none affraid;
So dauntless was he, that some witlings trace
His rightful lineage from a god's embrace.
One only daughter from his loins had sprung,
Around whose heart unnumber'd beauties hung.
Calipsa nam'd, whose charms so caught each eye,
The village swains did oft about her vie;
One youthful shepherd, singled from the rest,
The damsel's fancy seem'd to like the best,
And oft as home their bleating charge they drove,
Young Dorcus dropt unfeigned signs of love,
Which flowing gently thro' each partial vein,
Both sheep, and shepherds, saunter'd o'er the plain.

One cloudless evening, as across the glade
Young Dorcus walk'd beside the blooming maid,
with falt'ring tongue, and cheeks both passing pale,
He faintly ventur'd to unfold his tale;
Calipsa blush'd, and with her hand conceal'd
Her glowing cheeks, which more her case reveal'd.
The secret told, what need I more to say,
Each, by degrees, strove bashfulness away;
He, own'd a flame within his bosom dwell'd,
And she, a something never to be quell'd;
Night creeping in, the happy couple part,
Both deeply wounded by the urchin's dart.

Next morn to Trypho, swift young Dorcus fled,
(As, urg'd by Cupid, who'd have lain a-bed,)
To whom his wishes, gently he reveal'd,
Nor ought possess'd of, he from him conceal'd,
The sire oft smil'd, while Dorcus simply spoke,
It pleas'd him well, and thus from silence spoke,
"Calipsa take, and with her take, I pray,
Half of my flock, upon your wedding day."
The youth, enraptur'd, bow'd his thanks, and went
To where his damsel waited the event.
The news soon told, love sparkling in their eyes,
He to his bosom press'd the blooming prize;
Both highly joyous, nimbly o'er the green,
Like bounding kids, they long to close the scene.
The day propos'd, the bride-maid singled out,
He took his leave, and hastes to Colin Clout,
Who had a father always to him been,
And who Calipsa had so often seen.
When Collin heard what Trypho had foretold,
That on the marriage he'd divide his fold,
The dow'r he doubted, shook his head, look'd grave,
And own'd he fear'd, he meant to play the knave;
His words prophetic, facts confirm'd were true;
For scarce in one were join'd the happy two,
When angry Trypho thunder'd from his gate,
The sad Calipsa, and her darling mate.
Ah!  whither now shall these sad lovers go?
No cot to screen them from the chilling snow,
Two wretched outcasts, spurn'd from his hard breast,
Whose duty 'twas to see them not oppress'd.
As on they mov'd, bedew'd with virtues tear,
Nigh Collin's cot they found themselves draw near;
Who (gen'rous man) no sooner heard their fate,
Than his was theirs, and brighten'd up each mate;
Not wanting pity, open flew his doors,
And soon appear'd the choicest of his stores.

When this was known, as rumour's tongue is loud,
Soon thither flock'd the wonder-making croud;
Some sang applause, while others Trypho blam'd,
And Collin Clout, the county round was fam'd;
Who for his tender unimplor'd relief,
By ev'ry swain was soon acknowledg'd chief;
While old Sir Gripus, kin to none but self,
Remain'd a beggar, tho' so rich in pelf:
For if a man his hoard will not reduce,
To serve the needy, whence can rise its use.
Those who endeavour to get rich too fast,
Will find a pillow, thorny at the last.
The moral's plain, religion stamps it true,
Not only serve yourself but others too.
