And must my stubborn heart at last resign
The dear, dear treasure it has held so long,
And through the lingering day neglected pine,
The laughing sons of indolence among?
Still must I weave the melancholy song
For her whose soul commiserates my lot,
And, shunning mirth's infatuated throng,
Review the sweet &mdash; the pleasurable spot,
Where first that bliss ensued which ne'er shall be forgot?

Oh, my beloved!  must I turn me back 
To those sweet days of rapture and delight,
When even timorous friendship was not slack,
Thy smiles with distant passion to requite,
Those heavenly smiles, so ravishingly bright,
That fill'd my bosom with ingenuous pain?
Ah!  must I turn to that delicious night!
When, wrapt in love, we loiter'd on the plain,
Clung to each other's lips, and vow'd to meet again?

Come, ye soft visions of delusive joy!
Ye viewless spirits of ethereal flame!
Who round the poet's couch your hours employ,
And lead him up the slippery heights of fame:
Borne on your lightest pinions, round my frame,
O!  spread awhile your most enchanting spells,&mdash;
And teach my aching bosom to reclaim
Its wonted peace, where disappointment dwells,
And with the blooming hopes of innocence rebels.

O teach me to resign the heavenly prize
To some unknown (perhaps unworthy) breast,
To lose all fond remembrance of those eyes,
Where love had fixt his enviable nest:
O!  snatch me from the bosom I have press'd,
And from my nature every feeling tear,
For how can passion ever be suppress'd,
While memory holds her strong dominion there,&mdash;
How shall my heart escape the tortures of despair?

Yes, they have triumph'd; but the conquest brings
Love's bitterest tears, and envy, and despite;
And tho' remorse my bursting bosom wrings,
Years yet will cease of unreprov'd delight,&mdash;
And many a blooming day, and heavenly night,
And many a joy congenial to the heart,
When Hymen's self our sorrows shall requite,
And, freed from every miserable art,
Love spread his boundless wings, and every joy impart.

O, ne'er may I forget, to damp the flame,
What schemes their rage incessantly has tried;
What arts pursued to violate thy name,
And rob thy bosom of its fairest pride:
But who the rushing cataract shall guide,
Or who restrain the hyperborean blast,
That howls and thunders on the Baltic tide,
And tears up rocks that centuries made fast?
Who but ourselves, my love!  can recompense the past?

What tho' the parting sun some cloud obscure,
As down the western hills he holds his way,
Will, will not hope a brighter hour insure,
Beneath the morning's animating ray?
Will she not promise a sublimer day,
And deck the future with a softer hue?
Yes, she will smile, our injuries allay,
She still will prove benevolent and true,
And point to lovelier days, and raptures ever new.

But tho' discretion bid me to depart,
Resigning all the dear delights we've known,
The warm impassion'd kiss, the glowing heart,
Warm'd with a flame exclusively its own,
Still shall we think of many a pleasure flown,
When in the woods, in am'rous folds we lay;
Far from the ken of man, and left alone,
To hear the wild brook warbling on its way,
Beneath th' autumnal moon's invigorating ray.

Oft shall I think me of those melting hours,
That saw me leaning o'er thy heaving breast,
When love, and joy, and happiness were our's,
And all the friends of malice were at rest;
When every sense that Campbell hath express'd,
Reign'd in our bosoms, and our hopes inspir'd,
And promised days and years, for ever blest,
With all that sweet affection e're requir'd,
All that a woman loves, or virtue e'er desir'd.

And thou wilt think of me at midnight hour,
And view me, seated at my casement high,
Musing intent upon the moon's bright tow'r,
That shines sublimely in the southern sky;
And on the night wind breathe the languid sigh,
And think of days that never may return,
Days that, alas!  in dark oblivion lie,
And to the pleasures which they promis'd turn,
Grasp at the phantom hope, and for Philander mourn.

And oft amidst the silence of the night,
When all is peace, and not a zephyr moves,
And all is sheen beneath that holy light
Which friendship courts, and innocence approves:
Thou'lt fondly ponder on out mutual loves,
And think how many a memorable hour,
When evening deckt her amaranthine groves
With dropping pearls, within the moonlight bow'r,
We bent our murm'ring souls to love's dissolving pow'r.

Oh, my Leanthe!  can'st thou think of these,
These pleasant times, nor heave th' accustom'd sigh,
Such as the cautious ear of her may please,
Who scans the past with a regretful eye;
And thinks the heavenly vision still more nigh,
While deeply musing on each tranquil spot,
Where, unobserv'd, we oft were wont to be,
Pleas'd with our sweet inestimable lot,&mdash;
Lost to the busy world &mdash; by all the world forgot?

And yet, bewilder'd heart!  'tis all in vain,
To think those glowing hours will e'er return,
Those melting hours of pleasure and of pain,
When first I felt thee like Vesuvius burn!
They all are fled!  and I have now to learn
That stubborn task, no lover can perform&mdash;
How can I chase her from my thoughts, &mdash; how spurn
The lively recollection of her form,
And those indulgent eyes with amorous madness warm?

Oh!  she is lovelier than the new-blown rose&mdash;
Is sweeter than the hyacinth's perfume;
Upon her cheeks the flush of nature glows,
And in her eyes the laughing loves entomb!
There honour, truth, and fond affection bloom,
There heavenly bliss and gratitude may dwell.
Oh, fancy!  'tis in vain to crow'd thy loom
With her perfection!  'twere in vain to swell
For her the chorus of thy sublimer shell!

And will Leanthe of her tutor think,
When distance sets their aching souls apart?
Will she, in thought, upon his bosom sink,
And bind his melting spirit to her heart;
And to his lips her humid kiss impart,
And lull his feverish temples in her breast,
Watch o'er his tortur'd slumbers, nor depart
'Till all his wounded feelings be at rest,
And every hope destroy'd, and every thought suppress'd?

Let not th' unfeeling heart that cannot taste
Love's pure and sweet, ineffable delight,
And all those joys so amiably chaste,
That set the wrongs of our existence right,
Presume the buddings of my song to blight;
Or of its glowing properties complain!
Those who can feel the passions will unite,
To guard the muse, and vindicate her strain,
And in their raptures own, she has not sung in vain.

But if it meet my sweet Leanthe's eye,
And charm awhile her melancholy ear,
If it call forth one unaffected sigh,
One unpolluted and ingenuous tear:
I laugh to scorn the Cynic's vulgar sneer,
And all the malice of inveterate hearts!
For dear is feeling's voice &mdash; For ever dear
The heavenly tones that gratitude imparts,
Free from each selfish aim, and all ignoble arts.

Ah!  cou'd'st thou ponder on the tender strain,
Unmov'd, that charm'd the sympathetic air;
Or hear, at night, the soft guitars complain,
Touch'd by the hand of amorous despair,
Or see the floating gondolas prepare
To waft their couples to the realms of bliss,
Where neither withering prejudice, nor care,
Annoys the sweet, the passion-breathing kiss,
And all the tend'rer pleasures of a world like this?

Hark!  'tis the flute's wild melody that floats
Along the willows of yon silent stream,
Where fancy, listening to the love-sick notes,
Seems softly swooning in a rapt'rous dream:
There the pale crescent sheds her virgin beam,
And airy visions hold their vigil calm,
In such a sphere the murderer might seem
To taste awhile the sweet Lethean balm,
And deem himself secur'd from conscience and alarm.

But where the murderer finds a place of rest,
From all his own, and all the world's misdeeds,
Love feels new tortures rushing through his breast,
And, void of hope, upon destruction feeds!
At ev'ry thought his bursting bosom bleeds&mdash;
At ev'ry thought he gushes into woe,
And, in the future, not a promise reads
Of meeting that dear spirit, who below
Charm'd his deluded heart, and taught his tears to flow.

Ye soul-entrancing visions of delight!
That watch the lover as he lies at rest,
When on venetian bowers the pale moonlight,
Seems by some magic influence impress'd,
O, bear me, bear me to Leanthe's breast,
There let me taste of pleasures that are past,
Print on her ruby lips, with rapture blest,
One only kiss, the sweetest and the last,
Die in her wreathing arms, nor think my death too fast.

'Tis all the pleasure that Philander asks.
'Tis all he wishes or can hope to share;
And who shall tell his rapture while he basks
Upon a spot so delicately fair?
Who, but whose love may venture to compare
With his &mdash; alive to tenderness and woe,
Not such as sordid spirits may declare?
The rapt'rous thrills which thro' his bosom glow,
No such penurious hearts were ever taught to know!

Oh, might I languish in her circling arms,
For days, and years, and ages yet to be,
The sole possessor of her heavenly charms,
Even to the portals of eternity!
For what's the world, with all its joys, to me,
If reft of all my spirit can adore;
Love, beauty, truth, and dove-ey'd constancy,
That bosom fraught with intellectual lore?
Ah!  what's the world to me, if these delight no more?

Then, fare thee well, Leanthe!  and may heav'n
Watch o'er thy slumbers, and thy steps attend;
And since barbarian fate our forms hath riv'n,
In sweet communion shall our spirits blend!
Their rage and malice now are at an end,
Yet shall the sweet duplicity remain
O!  write me all thy sorrows, Love!  and send
Thy dear Philander many a soothing strain,
And he will answer thine, nor answer them in vain.
