Yes, I have looked on life &mdash; and in its spring
Have felt my spirit buoyant, and its light
As the fresh breeze of morn, that on its wing
Delights to waft the filmy clouds, that bright
Hang in the mild air, beauteous in the sight,
In rude fantastic forms &mdash; then, upward borne,
Merge into deeper shadows all their white:&mdash;
Thus did my life's young beauty visions turn
To deep dark shades of gloom, that now 'twere vain to mourn!

And I have look'd on life &mdash; if desolate
And bleak to me the view, it mattered not
Since I have learn'd to bend me to my fate
And have endur'd it, and can endure the lot
Which has been cast me &mdash; be the rest forgot&mdash;
I've learnt to love seclusion, and the shade&mdash;
The beauteous calm of the sequester'd grot&mdash;
The lonely haunt, for contemplation made,
Where the high-arching boughs o'erhung the grassy glade!

And fondly bend my thoughts, GLENFALL!  to thee:
Be thou, as erst, the minstrel's lonely theme!&mdash;
Won by a sad and secret sympathy.
My soul turns to thee:  darkly to I deem
The vision; somewhat more than mortal dream
That comes upon me, in thy wilderness
Of lovely shadows, that, in gloom, does seem
The fane of melancholy tenderness,
Where sorrow finds a charm, that breathes of happiness!

The sun is up in heaven!  his light of love
Is o'er creation thrown &mdash; as from the eye
Of the Omnipotent it shines above.&mdash;
The sun is up in heaven, and the blue sky
Seems bright and boundless as eternity,
And all on earth is blossoming and gay!
The air breathes balm &mdash; the grove sweet minstrelsy&mdash;
The wild birds shake fresh dew-drops from the spray,
Like tears that music steals from beauty's soul away!

The sun is up!  trees, leaves, and flowers rejoice,
And gladden up in the lustre of his beam!&mdash;
All but the brook &mdash; the echoes of a voice
Now hush'd for ever, rise up from the stream,
As on its murmurs ripple:  and the gleam
That lights the dark tide with its visitings,
Almost the shadow of his smile I deem;
For where her ray eternal genius flings,
Its essence glows among creation's loveliest things!

Friend of my boyhood! &mdash; could my tears o'erflow
With their fresh gush of feeling, &mdash; could they start
As in my day of better thought, &mdash; but no!
The dark and desolate fountain of my heart
Has long been frozen; tears had once a part,
And could relieve my woe, &mdash; but that is past;&mdash;
Thou!  who didst claim them all &mdash; what now thou art
I soon may be; &mdash; for thee they flowed full fast,
Thou mother of my being! &mdash; those tears were the last!

Friend of my boyhood! &mdash; could I weep for thee,
'Twould be some solace; &mdash; for, whilst here I stand,
And mark the autumnal bloom of every tree,
The cheerful shifting green hues of the land;
And see the promised harvest fruits expand;
And hear the burbling of the brook beneath,&mdash;
I pause and shrink, and feel my heart unmanned,
To think these yet have life &mdash; and that the breath,
That warm'd thy gentle spirit, now is hush'd in death!
