Abash'd, I fear, the self-supporting bard
"In lofty madness meditating song,"
May not his jaundic'd eye my theme behold,
Unless to risibility it tends?
To him I tender every graver thought,
And strain enthusiastically grand;
Because my muse, unequal to the task,
Forbears expose me to his critic scourge,
And humbly prompts the conic thimble's praise;
Praise not so polish'd as its surface bright,
But merited, because a coat of mail
It yields my lovely Daphne's finger top,
When dext'rously along the snow-white cloth
(Of Russia, Scotia, or Hollandia looms)
She wields the needle, and connects the stitch
With undulation quick, or with its eye
With warm-spun toil transfix'd awakens to life,
Life artificial!  Flora's flushing tints,
And bids the muslin to her blue-ey'd girls
Convey &mdash; a pattern, emulation fraught,
And smile a monument of female skill.
Of egg for sponge, and eborcan leaves,
(Whose azure veins concise memorial bear
Of lady Fancy's pericranian vest,
The last new toast fond scandal crush'd at court,
And of each rout the delegated hour)
With pencil small, and nippers, spoon and knife,
Thy form campanous boasts aurean make,
To aid in height'ning fame, in piece taperian,
With scripture tale, or story'd types enwove,
Or in ahenian coat the chaos blends
Of twenty little immaterial things,
Contents of Nelly's pouch; from whence oft snatch'd
The callus of her middle digit's top
To guard, as she the stocking darns, or hems
The 'kerchief gave her by enamour'd Hodge.
Or Suture's sons thy crownless tube explore,
Laps'd from the board, and 'whelm'd with shreds obscure,
To reinstate thy finger-circling pride.

Thee honours due I'll grant, and ne'er forget,
How once, when to the dark betray'd, I struck
The tinder-catching sparks, and soon restor'd
By thy chalybian aid (for then thou hadst
A coat chalybian; lucky that thou hadst!)
The fluid lustre of the treach'rous wick.
This was a boon material, and for this
Thou had'st deserv'd the notice of the muse.
But for assisting Daphne, when the wax
Upon the billet doux you lock'd secure,
And clos'd the vows with indentation strong,
For that, immortal wou'd I make thy name;
But, ah!  dear thimble, know thy bard's deny'd
One thimble full of the Pierian spring.
