Let these the musky-scented meads describe,
'Till long description pall Attention's ear;
And those of Amaryl and Daphne tell,
Till Venus pity and fulfil their loves.
Let some their revels Bacchanalian
(Revels liquor-urg'd, till languid reason
Drown'd in folly quit her mental throne,
And yield to laughing madness drunken joy;)
When morning clears the visual nerve, extol
And praise what cool reflexion should disdain:
And others, in soft pastoral, rehearse,
Or Tempe's charms or swains Arcadian.
Thrice happy in their simple state of life,
Thrice happy in their loves, loves undiseas'd
With foul intrigue, the Debauchee's delight;
Delight which terminates in loathsome thought.
I say, let others fancy please as best
It suits their genius, muse, and turn;
And COPYWELL, multiloquent of screw,
For cork design'd, or of his caxon preach,
Of potent porter, or of pudding sing:
I sing my stick, pre-eminent of sticks,
Torn from its mother crab in hedge of thorn,
In the first lustrum of its hopeful growth.
What time its tap'ring top, the hedge's top
Above began to tower, and own the tree
From whence descended, it was giv'n to shoot
To grace my hand; eradicated now,
It feels no more the spring's enliv'ning ray,
Nor buds obedient to the season kind,
Or gives to summer green or autumn leaf.
Strange revolution!  In the oven laid
It sweats profuse, and yields to fashion fair,
By carvers beauty-forming hand display'd.
Rare artist!  Is it then to thee I owe
The many beauties which my stick adorn?
The polish'd nodes, and the depressions smooth,
Like hills and dales irregularly seen,
In vernal view romantically gay.
The spiry twills, the polish'd nodes between,
Add ornamental strength, and grace the whole.
Nor must its lustrous head remain unsung.
If great ones may to small ones be compar'd,
Its head majestic bears a crown, a crown
Pinchbeckian, whose ample belly beds
A dagger for its foe, its master's foe:
For who my stick offends, me must offend
And hurt my pride, intolerable pain!
The stroke of pride, without resentment keen,
Who ever could, or ever will endure?
My stick I highly prize, beware ye beasts,
Not me attack when Syrius' fatal power
The fatal hydrophobia dooms
To race ferocious; or Bacchus blust'ring
In the heated breast of youth courageous,
Unreasonably bold and seeking whom,
He may insult.  O let his better fate
Or genius reign, and lull him into sleep
Before he loads me with absurd reproach,
Or by the goad of fancied wrong awakes
The ready vengeance of my parlous arm.
When from his urn Aquarius pours profuse
The liquid burden of the pregnant clouds,
And dirt obscene misgives unwary feet;
Me shall my stick uphold, and save me from
Th' offending bosom of the miry ground.
When ev'ning shuts the closing eye of day,
And I the bower'd path alone explore,
Meand'ring thro' a tedious way of wood,
In whose dark bosom many a ruffian lurks
For purpose dark!  The poor benighted swain
To rob, seal perchance that robbery with blood:&mdash;
Then shall, e'er faithful to my cause, my stick
Upon the bloody foe reck vengeance warm,
And lay the villain trembling at my feet.
Thro' farmers yards or by the tanners pits,
Whene'er I wander with my plant in hand,
I fearless walk, nor dread the rage of dogs.
A time there was when as I saunter'd slow,
Absorb'd in thought, a mastiff fierce and loud
Broke on my silence, and my dog abus'd:
Nor him abus'd alone, but snarl'd at me
Appall'd:  till from its cavern dark I hurl'd
The pointed terror of insulting curs;
Mindless awhile of which the bravo stood,
And held in scorn the menace of my arm;
Till sudden piercing thro' his nether leg,
I dealt the sharp premeditated wound;
Then hideous cries proclaim'd his near escape,
Proclaim'd at distance, for long way he ran,
And frighten'd all his species with his howls.
Such service merits the reward of praise,
And praise I will the weapon of my guard;
Nor grudge the beau his scabbard of defence,
For mode more priz'd than priz'd for real use.
The sword I covet not, give me my stick,
And fear occasion for its use, ye curs
Of every kind, or human or canine.
