In Virgin's sign bright Sol cast forth his sheen,
And hot upon the meads he flung his ray;
The apple redded from its palie green,
And the rich pear bent down the leafy spray;
The spotted goldfinch sang the live-long day;
'Twas now the pride, the manhood of the year,
And all the earth was drest in its most lovely gear.

The Sun was glowing in the midst of day,
Dead still the air, and eke the welkin blue,
When from the sea arose in dread array,
A heap of clouds of sable, sullen hue,
The which full fast unto the woodland drew,
Shrouding at once the bright Sun's beauteous face
And the black tempest swell'd and gather'd up apace.

Beneath an elm, fast by the pathway side,
Which did unto Saint Godwin's Convent lead,
A hapless Pilgrim, moaning did abide,
Poor in his purse, and wretched in his weed;
Long tortur'd with the miseries of need:
Where from the hailstone could the wretched fly?
He saw no cottage there, nor any convent nigh!

Look in his gloomy face, his sprite there scan;
How woe-begone &mdash; how wither'd &mdash; sapless &mdash; dead!
Haste to thy church-glebe house, O wretched man!
Haste to thy grave &mdash; thine only sleeping bed,
Cold as the clay which will grow on thy head;
"Is Charity (said he) among high elves?
Ah!  Knights and Barons live for pleasure and themselves!"

The gather'd storm is ripe &mdash; the big drops fall,
The parched meadows smoke, and drink the rain;
The ghastly tempest doth the cattle pall,
And the full flocks driving o'er the plain;
Dash'd from the clouds the waters fly again;
The welkin gapes &mdash; the yellow lightning flies,
And the hot vapour in the flashing red flame dies.

Spurring his palfry o'er the watery plain,
The Abbot of St. Godwin's Convent came;
His chapournette was drenched with the rain,
His painted swath did put Sir Priest to shame;
He backward told his bead-roll at the same;
The storm increased, and he drew aside
With the poor beggar near the elm to bide.

His cloak was wrought of Lincoln cloth most fine,
With a gold button fasten'd near his chin,
His loose white robe was edg'd with tawdry twine,
And his spruce shoe, a rich lord's might have been;
Full well it show'd, that coat he thought no sin:
The trammels of the palfrey pleas'd his sight,
His carcase well laid out, his head with roses dight.

"An alms, Sir Priest!" the drowned Pilgrim said,
"O!  let me stand within your Convent door,
Till the sun shineth high above our head,
And the loud tempest of the sky is o'er;
Helpless and old, alas!  I am, and poor;
No house &mdash; no friend &mdash; no money in my pouch;
All that I call my own is this my silver crouch!";

"Varlet!" replied the abbot, "cease your din,
This is no season alms and prayers to give;
My Porter never lets a beggar in;
None have my cheer, but what in honour live!"
Now with black clouds the Sun began to strive,
And shooting on the ground his glaring ray,
The Abbot plied his spurs, and quickly flew away.

Once more the sky was black, the thunder roll'd;
Fast running o'er the plain a Priest was seen;
Nor drest so proud, nor button'd up in gold,
His cloak was grey, and his short surplice clean;
A Limitoure he was to Abbot mean!
And from the pathway side then turned he,
Where the poor beggar lay beneath the wide elm-tree.

"An alms, Sir Priest!" the drenched Pilgrim said,
"For sweet Saint Mary and your Order sake;"
The Limitoure then lossen'd his pouch thread,
And did, from it, a groat of silver take;
The wretched Pilgrim did for gladness shake;
"Here, take this silver, it may ease thy care;
We are but God's stewards all &mdash; nought of our own we bear.

"But ah!  unhappy Pilgrim!  learn of me,
Scarce any give a rent-roll to their Lord;
Here, take my short-cloak, thou art bare, I see&mdash;
'Tis thine &mdash; the Saints will give me my reward."
He left the Pilgrim with this kindly word,
"Virgin and holy Saints, who Heaven do fill,
O give the good man power, or give the mighty will!"
