'Twas at the solemn feast of loyal sinners
Who love their country dearly as their dinners,
Aloft in awful state,
Kit Smith the vintner sate,
Rais'd on a cushion'd throne:
His brother aldermen were placed around,
Their brows with spreading antlers crown'd,
So city spouses should be found;
His lovely lady by his side,
Sat like a plump high German bride,
Not less for fat renown'd than pride;
Happy, happy, happy pair,
None but Kit Smith, none but Kit Smith,
None but Kit Smith, e'er kissed the bouncing pair.

Obsequious Dignum placed on high,
Surveys with mute desire
The tempting feast, beneath his eye,
Then licks his lips, and then proceeds to try,
Such notes as civic joys require.

The song began from Billy's toil,
Who boldly left his native soil,
Resolv'd to share in war's turmoil:
A col'nel's uniform belied the man;
In his own yacht so loftily he sail'd,
The sea gods their degraded state bewail'd,
Eclips'd by him, as o'er the vessel's prow,
He thro' his opera glass survey'd the waves below:
The listening crowd admire the lofty sound,
A present Nelson &mdash; loud they shout around,
A present Nelson, &mdash; loud the raftered halls rebound.
With prick'd-up ears,
Kit Smith the vintner hears;
Assumes the warriors frown,
And shakes the room about his ears.

The praise of venison next, the hir'd Apollo sung,
Of venison, whether old or young:
The jolly haunch in triumph comes,
Sound the trumpets, beat the drums!
Flushed with a purple grace,
It shews its current-jelly face:
Now give each feeder breath &mdash; it comes &mdash; it comes;
Venison's beauties, old or young,
How can language e'er reveal
Fat of venison is a treasure,
Eating is the glutton's pleasure,
Sweet as stuffing is with veal.

Sooth'd with the sound, great Kit grew vain,
Eat all his custards o'er again,
And thrice he pick'd the bones of ducks, and thrice of turkies slain;
Dignum saw his stomach rise,
His yawning mouth, his longing eyes,
And while he necks and sides defied,
Changed his note and checked his pride:
He chose a Newgate muse,
Soft pity to infuse;
He sung the poacher's sad untimely fate,
By law severe, tho' good,
Swinging, swinging, swinging, swinging,
Swinging before the felon's gate,
For spilling sylvan blood.
Deserted at his utmost need
By those his former thefts had fed;
Exposed to all this rabble town,
Without a friend to cut him down;
With joyless visage, Kit dejected sat,
Tho' still revolving in his altered soul,
The various turns of spits below,
And now and then a "backward" sigh he stole,
While streams of Pactolian sought their vent, to flow.

The modern Orpheus smiled to see,
That sleep was sin the next degree;
'Twas but a drowsy strain to keep,
For muses lull their babes to sleep.
Gently dull in hum-drum numbers,
Thus he soothed his soul to slumbers;
Picking bones is toil and trouble,
Syllabub an empty bubble;
Never ending, still beginning,
Eating, still the substance missing,
Think if fat be worth thy winning,
Thy wife is surely worth thy kissing.
Both wife and venison see beside thee,
Take what fate, thy cook, provides thee.
The many rend the skies with loud applause,
So sleep was crowned, but Dignum won the cause.

Poor Kit, scarce able to keep ope his eyes,
Peep'd at the food,
That warm'd his blood,
And licked his lips, and lick'd his lips,
And lick'd his lips (to stir, in vain he tries;)
At length as sunk in sleep's soft arms he stretches,
The snorting alderman defiles his &mdash;

Now tune thy whistle, Dignum, once again,
A louder yet, and yet a louder strain,
Break the bands of sleep asunder,
With noise more frequent than his postern thunder,
Hark!  hark!  the horrid sound,
Has raised up his head,
Tho' as heavy as lead,
And he stares and &mdash;'s around.
Revenge, revenge, Apollo cries,
See the minions of excise,
See the permits that flutter in the air,
See supervisors pair by pair,
Each eager for his smuggled prize,
Behold the well known band,
Each with a gauging bamboo in his hand,
Run down thy cellar stairs, a dreadful train:
Their office done securely they remain,
In Round-court or in Drury-lane.

Give the drubbing due,
To the wretched crew.
Behold how they toss their noses on high,
Bid them seek Cloacina's abodes,
Congenial temples for such hostile gods,
The company pleased such expedient was hit on,
Kit Smith caught up the permits to &mdash;
His wife the door unbarr'd
To light him to the yard,
A theme for Patty Pan to shew his wit on.

Let Curtis yield Kit Smith the prize,
Or both divide the crown:
That raised a turtle to the skies,
Kit gorged a turtle down.
