The hand of time has rung the parting knell,
The busy, bustling scene at length is o'er;
Within these walls, dull peace and silence dwell,
These walls, where noise and nonsense reign'd before.

No swelling sounds my list'ning ear approach,
No voices now in fine confusion rise,
Save the rough rattle of the passing coach,
Or piercing melody of Dublin Cries;

Save that from yonder church's trembling tower
The joyous bells their peals obstreperous ring,
To celebrate the fall of Lawless Power,
The Gaul returning to his rightful King.

Beneath this cobweb'd roof, and on this floor,
Where not a mortal but myself now stands,
How oft' was heard the BOARD'S tumultuous roar,
The clamorous plaudit, and the clap of hands?

The hope which bade DISUNION'S friends rejoice,
The envied honour of OUR SPEAKER'S chair,
The Doctor's twang, the Lawyers brazen voice,
No more shall rouse them from their deep despair.

For them no more the midnight Lamps shall burn,
Or titled Chairmen on their labours smile;
Nor Secretary make his year's return
Of tenpennies collected through the Isle.

Oft did the statute to their purpose bend,
The neck of law oft felt their sturdy stroke;
How many a brave petition here was penn'd,
How many a resolution made &mdash; and broke!

Let not grave Wisdom mock their shallow views,
Their dreams of Empire, their new Rights of Man;
Nor pride of British Senators refuse
Some credit to the bold but luckless plan.

The happiest system fram'd by mortals skill,
The highest fabric vast ambition rears,
Can but its short and destin'd course fulfil,
Relentless Time no human structure spares.

Perhaps in this deserted room was seen
Some genius form'd on Fame's bright wing to soar,
Had times and changes more propitious been,
Had revolution throve on Ireland's shore.

But niggard Fortune, to their merits blind,
Refus'd the sanction of her fostering aid,
To petty feuds their noble rage confin'd,
And o'er their glories cast an envious shade.

Full many a vein of Copper's stubborn ore
The rugged mountain's unpierc'd bosom fills,
Full many a string of Florin's valued store
Spreads all unnoticed on the northern hills.

Mayhap, 'midst Chiefs, whose too contracted bound
Forbade them Faction's trespass to exceed,
Some unfledg'd Buonaparte might be found,
Some Cromwell with the will, but not the deed.

O'er spurn'd authorities to hold command,
The subjects sworn allegiance to despise,
To mar the scheme by ancient Wisdom plann'd,
They greatly aided &mdash; but Fate withheld the prize.

Yet not unfruitful was the project bold
To stripling Lawyers feath'ring here their nest,
Who saw the swelling bag its briefs scarce hold,
The bag where moths once found untroubled rest.

Through what strange scenes and changes all things pass,
In this uncertain sublunary sphere!
Perhaps, where ranted champions of the Mass,
Some raving Methodist may split the ear!

Perhaps the buskin'd hero here may tread,
To act like us his temporary part;
Some grave Professor's lectures may be read,
Or crowds admire some newer Juggler's art!

Such is the changeful state of all below,
And we must learn to bear the common lot;
Yet shall it some consoling hope bestow,
To think, tho' dead, we shall not be forgot&mdash;

Yes &mdash; to my fancy grateful is the task,
To paint to future times our fate deplor'd;
To think should curious wight hereafter ask,
Some hist'ry of the once renowned Board.

How haply some old Dublin cit may say,
Oft have we seen them, like a flight of crows,
Urging to yon lov'd place their evening way,
And, like Macbeth, destroying night's repose.

There, (for tho' young we squeez'd to get a place)
How did we wonder at their strength of lungs,
The noble fire of every brazen face,
The modern Babel and its strife of Tongues.

Forbear fond muse &mdash; no further traits disclose,
The curtain falls &mdash; the Sun descends in fog&mdash;
They seek in distant wilds unwish'd repose,
Macgillicuddy's Reeks, and Allen's Bog.&mdash;
