The various pleasures of the festive board,
On which (when summon'd by the welcome bell,
Old Alma Mater's sons to hall repair)
The fam'd sirloin, with dignity serene,
Oft smokes, I sing.  Nor ye my song disdain,
Beef-loving tribe, whose bloated paunches speak
The study'd luxury of living well.&mdash;
Declare, my muse, how oft the chearing glass,
Circling revolves.  Yet stop; one slice, and then&mdash;
Friend of the smile, on whose dilated brow
The grin congenial spreads its ample sway,
Whene'er or laugh-exciting joke goes round,
Or luckless Gorman in the lordly dish,
Haply his sleeve infuse; say, would'st thou roam,
Where pale-ey'd sorrow spreads her gloom severe!
Or rather seek those joy-diffusing seats
(Happier by far, and with more glee beheld)
Where the brisk nectar courts the rosy lip
Of Senior Fellow, deeply vers'd I ween
In classic lore, more deeply in the lore
Of mystic cavern, vulgarly yclep'd
A cellar, where, beneath the rip'ning dust,
In order meet arrang'd, full bottles sleep
Their stated time, nor into light emerge,
Till, or the annual gaudy chears the scene,
Or when (by patron's care, or lucky chance
Of death) some living falls.  The deep recess
He then explores, and into long-lost light
The tatter'd victims drags.  With glee he views
The foaming crest; already warm  his brain
With fancy'd juice; the real joy succeeds,
And fancy is no more.&mdash;
What follows next?  Forbear, my muse, to say;
Alas!  too many know!  Nor will I sing
That tasteless follies of a vicious age.&mdash;
Thus roll his hours along &mdash; Mean while he boasts
Of ceaseless vigour, and ne'er failing health,
But soon &mdash; th' effect of many a dire debauch!
The dread disease arrests his teeming joys.
Lo!  from his tott'ring hand th' uplifted glass
Now spills &mdash; sad presage of his future woes!
In durance vile confin'd &mdash; At sixty, lo!
A Valetudinarian grown; in vain
He plans unheard of methods to restore
His long-lost vigour &mdash; vain his efforts all!
The dire disease gains ground &mdash; behold him now
Of ev'ry joy bereft, doom'd to remain
A living prey to ev'ry human ill
A sad memento to each tippling swain!
Such are his joys; and such the consequence
Of joys like these.  Be't ours with care to [illegible]
The progress dire; nor with less care to shun
The path which rev'rend Dulness points to view.
