Whilst T&mdash;y, wealthy maid, was ruing,
Time mispent in fruitless wooing,
Suitors five with ardor swelling;
Made their constant home her dwelling;
Praying, fighting, swearing, drinking,
From vice or folly seldom shrinking:
Till once, 'tis said, worn out with waiting,
They swore they'd know sans more debating,
Each playing his appropriate part,
Who best deserved her virgin heart.

First W&mdash; rushed, his nose on fire,
And prostrate on the carpet laid;
No amorous sounds his lungs suspire,
His snorings only reach the maid.

Next D&mdash;'s duke his luck to try,
Salutes the fair in accents sweet;
But stammering, blushing, trembling, shy,
He stumbles o'er the coxcomb at her feet.

Recovered from his prostrate state,
In sighs alone is grief he tells:
And his full bosom, hapless fate!
At once with port and speechless passion swells.

But thou!  oh P&mdash;e, with legs so nimble,
French or German was the figure,
That sooth'd the heavenly virgin's rigor,
And made thee dearer than her topaz thimble?
Amidst the mazes of the sprightly dance,
He trips and turns as merry as a grig:
And as the Self resounds, or Drops of Nantz,
More beauteous wave the locks of T&mdash;y's wig,
While to the hollow drum, and squeeking fiddle,
They hand in hand curvet it down the middle.
And longer had they danc'd, but with a frown
C&mdash; gracefully arose;
Flush'd with a purple grace
He shows his honest face,
Then threw his princely 'kerchief down;
And with an amorous look,
From out his fob his diamond snuff-box took;
And ever and anon with gentle beat,
He pats its ivory lid so neat,
And tho' sometimes, each gentle pause between,
Dejected Jordan by his side,
Her soul-subduing voice applied;
Yet still the prince, with simp'ring mien,
Unable to conceal his pain,
Gaz'd on the fair
Who caus'd his care,
And sigh'd, and look'd, sigh'd and look'd, sigh'd and look'd and sigh'd again.
Oh!  happy prince!  each raptured minion cries,
Oh!  happy prince, obsequious John replies.
With ravish'd ears
Great Cl&mdash;e hears;
Affects to nod;
Assumes the god,
And seems to shake the spheres:
At length with love and joy at once opprest,
The sopha yields his royal &mdash; rest.

With moistened eyes just fresh from weeping,
His pockets empty, spoiled his sleeping,
From hazard see the stripling dupe appear,
One hand contains a pistol, one a song:
One meant for W&mdash;y, t' other from Miss L&mdash;.
So Mars with Cupid ran his joint career.
Scarce had he heard the distant voice of Pole,
Before he pocketed the scroll,&mdash;
From his weak grasp the empty pistol fled&mdash;
That pistol!  emblem of its owner's head,
Down the steep stairs on terror's pinions born,
He seeks the well-known inn, and journies back forlorn.

But oh!  how heightened was the festive scene,
When the bold B&mdash; trod the spacious floor,
They would have thought who saw his ghastly stare
And lofty strut, a monkey to a bear,
In some far distant land, this (worthy) bore.
Furr'd was his neck, death from his bosom grinn'd,
And on his cap two cross-bones struck their view;
In shape like his, the crafty devil knew,
Had he appeared, not lovely Eve had sinn'd.
With his bold arm, so oft he'd stemm'd the flood,
The wave had wash'd all modesty away;
Through fire v&mdash; and through goose's blood,
He'd rak'd and eat of life his devious way;
His w&mdash;s serv'd to veil the smile malign,
To hide 'neath folly's mask the dark design,
And from his arts to turn the public gaze away.

Vain were the prince's trickling tears,
The blubbering D&mdash;'s bashful fears,
Sir G&mdash;'s thundering snore,
The Baron's labial sprouts so long,
Or stripling Kilworth's namby-pamby song,
The wondrous offspring of his riper years:
A wealthier youth the cap of victory wore.
To happy P&mdash; her hand advancing
He led her to the grand piano,
And now on him, now on the music glancing,
She strum'd the lively Morgiana.
They would have thought who heard the strain,
Cramer himself aerial notes was playing,
Except when gazing to relieve her pain,
Her eyes on Pole, lingering too long remain,
Her sympathizing digits much delaying:
While W&mdash;y nodding, with his head keeps time,
Like Bacchus on the Victory's prop sublime!
Rising and sinking with the boisterous main!

Oh!  Hymen, to thy sacred fane
Why looks the virtuous youth in vain;
Why share thy once propitious sway,
With him whom none but wretched fools obey;
And close thy gates against the virtuous few,
Whose wealth is scanty, as their hearts are true?
Resume, propitious deity, thy sway:
On virtue shed thy mild benignant ray;
The salutary influence impart,
To sooth the passions, and to mend the heart;
Appear in form as radiant and sublime,
As in our fathers' elder time:
Another race of worshippers create,
And justify the tales the aged sons relate!
