Fair rising from her icy couch,
Wan herald of the floral year;
The snow-drop marks the Spring's approach,
Ere the first primrose groups appear!
Or peers the Arum through its spotted veil,
Or violets scent the cold, capricious gale.

Then thickly strew'd in woodland bowers,
Anemonies their stars unfold;
Then spring the sorrel's veined flowers;&mdash;
And rich in vegetable gold,
From calyx pale the freckled cowslip born,
Receives in jasper cups the fragrant dews of morn.

Lo!  the green thorn her silver buds,
Expands to Maia's genial beam;&mdash;
Hottonia blushes on the flood;
And where the slowly trickling stream
Through grass, and spiry rushes glides
Her lovely fringed flowers fair Menyanthes hides.

In the lone copse or shadowy dale,
Wild clustering knots of hare-bells blow;
And droops the lily of the vale,
O'er vinca's matted leaves below;&mdash;
The Orches race with varied beauty charm,
And mock the exploring bee, or fly's aerial form.

Wound o'er the hedge-row's oaken boughs
The woodbine's tassels float in air;
And blushing, the uncultur'd rose
Hangs high her beauteous blossoms there;
Her fillets there the purple Nightshade weaves,
And pale Brionia winds her broad and scollop'd leaves.

To later summer's fragrant breath,
Clemati's feathery garlands dance;
The hollow fox-glove nods beneath,
While tall Mullein's yellow lance
(Dear to the mealy tribe of evening) towers
And the weak Galium weaves her myriad tiny flowers.

Sheltering the coot's or wild-duck's nest,
And where the timid Halcyon hides,
The Willow-herb in crimson drest,
Waves with Arundo o'er the tides:
And there the bright Nymphea loves to lave
And spreads her golden orbs along the dimpling wave.

And thou!  by pain and sorrow blest
Papaver that an opiate dew
Conceals't beneath thy crimson vest
Contrasting with Cyanus blue,
The autumnal months behold thy gaudy leaves,
Bend in the rustling gale amid the tawny sheaves.

From the first bud whose vent'rous head
The winter's lingering tempest braves,
To those which 'mid the foliage dead,
Shrink latest to their annual graves;
All are for use, for health, for pleasure given,
All speak in various ways the bounteous hand of Heaven!
