Offspring of night, whose languid visage wears
Death's milder lineaments!  Thy friendly art,
With lenient balm, the drooping soul repairs,
An in a sweet oblivion laps the heart.
Around my couch thy noiseless wings diffuse,
Fraught with ambrosial scents, and ev'ning's dews.

The vent'rous seaman, 'mid the rocking shrouds,
Touch'd with thy potent wand, his toil foregoes;
While thund'ring billows mingle with the clouds,
Hangs on the mast in terrible repose:
Stretch'd on his shield beneath ignominious skies,
Th' intrepid warrior veils his formidable eyes.

Then why, capricious power, so long delay'd
Thy genial blessings to my rural hill?
Whose solemn brow no ruder sounds invade
Than drowsy murmurs from a falling rill;
Than the warm-whisper'd sigh, when lovers true
Beneath heir fav'rite oak the tender vow renew.

The traitor, canopy'd with lordy pride,
On hissing serpents bows his perjur'd head;
The mute attendants guard their patron's side,
And tapers burn as round the noble dead:
But oh!  he lives:  that faulchion, gleaming nigh
Betrays his guilty fears, that groan, his misery.

Th' impure recesses of adult'rous lust,
The ghastly ruffian's floor, with slaughter red,
Thy visits shun; where conscience, ever just,
And vengeful furies haunt the cursed bed;
While hideous shrieks and livid light appall
The trav'ller wand'ring near th' inhospitable wall.

Not all the treasures of the radiant west,
Or precious gems that eastern quarries hold,
Would give one placid hour of cordial rest
To the pale slave, whose bosom pines for gold:
Not all that nature's azure round contains
Would bribe thee to the roof, where hell-born malice reigns.

How regular the ways of Providence!
Though various:  on a promontory's brow
The eagle slumbers; safe in innocence
The humble lark on trodden plains below:
These with the setting sun; then tygers howl
In deserts:  those retire, as morning paints the pole.

Earth, ocean, air, thy ancient empire own,
Majestic man!  exalt thy aweful voice;
Grasp firm thy sceptre; fix thy regal crown:
And in unrivall'd sovereignty rejoice:
Yet mark, how crimes degrade thy honour'd race
Beneath the sleeping worm, that glistens in the grass.

My soul the chains of lawless passion spurns
With honest indignation:  yet betray'd
To various ills, in dust and ashes mourns,
Her adours quench'd, her vivid pow'rs decay'd:
Misfortune opes her quiver; ling'ring pain
And sickness dip the parts in more than Indian bane.

Some lofty minds, that boast a vig'rous frame,
Adversity's rough storms undaunted bear;
Their faculties, expanding, brighter flame,
Like beacons, blazing in a ruffled air:
But in a feeble heart, the spark divine
Fades as a dying lamp, and all it's hopes decline.

O!  when shall I, soft sleep, thy influence find?
What happy clime the gentle charm will yield?
Waft me, ye sails, where blows the tepid wind
O'er orange flow'rs, and citrons strew the field:
Ah!  no:  'mid these my hapless youth has stray'd,
Nor met thy soothing smiles within the fragrant shade.

The swain, extended by romantic streams,
Hugs bright-ey'd phantoms, and delusive joys:
The monarch triumphs in imperial dreams
Of vanquish'd realms, and sanguinary toys:
No gaudy scenes of pictur'd bliss I crave;
But peace profound as death, and silent as the grave.

Is there a sage, whose philosophic mind,
Lur'd by the moon's wan lustre, upward springs,
Swift as the darted beam; and, unconfin'd,
It's bold flight 'mid stupendous wonders wings,
Where never pinion soar'd?  Thy power restrain,
Nor with lethargic clouds his grand ideas stain.

Is there a bard, whose spirit-piercing lays
(Sublime and glowing with seraphic fire)
Pour to yon list'ning orbs his Maker's praise?
'Twere sacrilege to hush the pious lyre.
A voice forbids; and angels, glitt'ring round,
Strike their symphonious harps, while earth and heav'n resound.

But when some wretch, in pensive mood withdrawn
To a lone vale, or melancholy grove,
From dewy-finger'd eve to purple dawn
Bemoans his suff'rings, as a wounded dove;
'Tis thine, his bleeding anguish to assuage,
Spread, like the mantling vine, o'er all his hermitage.

For me; though, careless of my suppliant woe,
No strain can win thee to this flutt'ring breast,
The willing tomb will lay my sorrows low,
Where mingled sleep th' oppressor and th' oppress'd;
'Till heav'n to one eternal morn restore
My ravish'd eyes; and thou and death shall be no more.
