Ye who would smile at simple nature's child,
Whose world seems bounded by his forest wild;
At the first white ship, with amazement dumb,
Musing from whence the prodigy should come;
Thrown up from Ocean's yet unfathom'd store?
Or dropp'd from heaven upon th' unwonted shore?
Smile too at deep philosophy, at pause,
Baffled, and overtask'd to trace the cause,
Whence all these wondrous changes had their birth,
In one short aera &mdash; one small nook of earth.
Smile at state prophecy, whose broadest light
Could never paint a vision, half so bright;
And smile at history, toiling at her scroll,
In vain, to note the changes as they roll.

There was, a time, and that within the span
Of the brief memory of short-liv'd man,
When, close confined along th' Atlantic seas,
The timid settler heard the western breeze,
And shrunk, expectant of the savage dart,
Or whizzing arrow, at his beating heart.
The western Mountains stood in awful forms,
Like clouds surcharg'd with tempest, fire and storms,
Whence the red bolt of rapid death might fly,
And whirlwinds rend the ocean and the sky;
For there did lurk the white-man's deadliest foe,
Gathering to burst upon the vales below.
A solemn race &mdash; a dark relentless clan,
That own'd no ties of blood with civil man;
A fearful foe &mdash; combining human art,
The wiles of serpents, and the tiger's heart:
Their sternest joy to daunt and scourge a race,
Softened by love &mdash; refined by Christian grace;
In tangled dells, where not heaven's light had shin'd,
They held there home &mdash; apt emblem of their mind.

Here many a bounteous stream majestic pours,
From distant mountains, to the ocean shores,
And in their course, enrich the earth in vain&mdash;
All unexplored, or hill, or vale, or plain,
And he was passing bold, who dared advance
Up toward their source, or e'en a thought to glance.
The soil was held by unresisted might,
The tiger's and the wolf's prescriptive right;
Nay e'en more awful images might wake&mdash;
Thick swarming skiffs along the stream and lake,
With desp'rate skill against the rapids glide,
Or down the cataract's tumultuous tide;
And hark!  the warwhoop o'er the valley floats;&mdash;
The wolf's wild howls are music's softest notes.

But light at length prevails; darkness retreats,
To fix, in distant dens, her gloomy seats:
Improving nature, at this long delay
Indignant, from her barriers bursts away,
Shakes off the savage forms, by which oppress'd
She languish'd long, and with new charms is dress'd.
The dark, cold tribes, less boldly urge the strife,
And melt before the light of civil life:
And gathering courage now, th' heroic swain,
Pursues them far toward the western main;
Nor yet the flight, nor the pursuit gives o'er,
Until their strength and terrors are no more:
Then turns to peaceful homes, and bright'ning plains,
Where life to long-protracted age remains.
The yeomen still survive, whose eye can trace
Successive changes on out country's face:
Where forests frown'd are shining cities seen,
And fields with Eden's bounty smile serene:
And many a soldier lives to tell the tales
Of deadly strife, mid yonder hills and vales;
Can point the spot where raging battle stood,
The very turf that drank his father's blood;
Can show the lake or stream where brothers bled,
Whose bones, scarce whiten'd, pave their lowly bed.
Perhaps some hero lives, who led the brave,
To freedom's boon, or honor's hallow'd grave;
His locks scarce changed &mdash; scarce lost, their raven hue:
Still firm in, strength &mdash; in thought and memory true;
Come Fancy!  come!  the image fair portray
Of some firm vet'ran bending back his way
To yonder fields, the arena of his strife,
For home and country, liberty and life.

Bright in his memory is the open glade,
Remotest trace that industry had made;
And fresh the image of the forest fierce,
Deep tangled, not meridian suns could pierce,
Where the grim savage, turning from his prey,
Slunk, like the wolf, and shun'd the face of day.
Onward the veteran moves; but where's that lawn,
Once the last line that civil man had drawn?
And where that wild wood rising dark and high,
Like strong embattled fortress to the sky!
Lo!  ether fields in endless prospect rise,
And like th' horizon, still the forest flies.
Yet sure 'twas here opposing armies stood;
That is the stream that reddened with his blood;
It was from thence the wild man's warwhoop rose,
And here he stemm'd the onset of the foes;
But lo!  the plain, hill, valley, all around,
With the bright POP'LOUS VILLAGE now are crown'd.
There, where the Indian often earth'd the wolf,
Along the brink of yonder tumbling gulph,
The rocks have yielded to the workman's hand,
And there in splendid palaces they stand.
Where the brisk waterfall, whose music found
No ear but echo once, to catch the sound,
Now, all its aid to human arts applied,
Prepares our food, and dress, and wealth beside;
See wheels on wheels, in mystic motion there!
The rattling engines of Minerva's care.

On yonder well-remember'd rising ground,
Where tallest firs with deepest shadows frown'd,
There now the noble Church sends up her spire,
To catch day's latest, and his earliest fire.
There, where the solitary wigwam stood,
Uncouthly form'd of stakes and leaves and mud,
Whose door stood wide, because it could not close,
To welcome weary wild men to repose;
Or mid the clouds of smoke and filth, to share
The half-seeth'd members of the savage bear;
There now the stately Inn, a spacious seat,
Invites the weary to refined retreat.
Around where ignorance had tak'n her stand,
With reign primeval, o'er the darken'd land,
See Learning's nurseries at ev'ry turn,
Where every urchin finds the means to learn;
And onward, see the high school's spacious halls,
And onward still, the prouder College walls.
Here bustling Trade is laden with his bales;
There Commerce spreads her wings, unfurls her sails;
Here on canals, deep freighted barges toil;
There groaning wains with products of the soil;
The thronging streets what busy numbers fill!
What tides of passengers roll onward still!
Not fled from want, but drawn by interest's bond
To visit peopled regions far beyond.
There, where the guard-house frown'd upon yon height
And weary sentinels wore out the night
With painful vigils, on their loaded arms,
To save the sleeping hamlet from alarms;
There now the green-house, shaded with the vine
And summer flowers, with evergreens entwine.
The terrors of the wilderness are fled,
And Niagara's thunders lost their dread;
Down its deep chasm, no hazard of his life,
Goes the soft cit, and e'en his softer wife.
And Huron's shadowy shore lights up its brow,
And wild Oswego does but tinkle now,
Whose very name but sounded, once would dart
A nervous terror through a foreign heart.
All these are fled, and peace and plenty reign
O'er rising town, and cultivated plain.

And say what subtle causes, passing strange,
Have in short period, wrought this mighty change?
Ask not Philosophy to find the clue,
For she will doubt, or swear it is not true;
Nor over History's dark annals pore,
For she records no parallel before.
But make your common sense, and nought beside,
Plain, unsophisticated sense, your guide.
Look on this generous soil, producing bread,
That even surplus millions might be fed:
See here no want, to stint the human frame,
Nor toils excessive, to impair the same;
No straitened bounds, no stifled city's breath
To breed contagion, and engender death;
No feudal lords, to act the tyrant's part,
Nor cringing vassalage, to blight the heart;
No proud oppressor, visiting your door,
To pluck from industry her well earn'd store;
No bribery, to evade those righteous laws,
That touch the poor man's as the rich man's cause:
No border warriors, pouncing on their prey,
Transport your wealth and children far away;
But unbarr'd gates and doors will safely keep
Your golden treasures, and your children's sleep.
Trace here the cause, for verily you can,
The magic art, of multiplying man.
When Europe's sons, from their precarious seats
Had ris'n, and sought for more secure retreats,
Hope pointed hither, as the promised shore&mdash;
Hither the tides of emigration pour.
The lab'rer loathed that masters of the soil
Should hold the total profit of his toil,
Fled to the spot, where freedom's base was laid,
Dress'd his own vine, and sat beneath its shade.
From legal plunder, too, the rich man came,
To save some remnant from the STATE'S fell claim;
The poor man rose, and followed to the land,
Where full supplies reward the feeblest hand
Or where at least, when deep misfortunes meet,
The wholesome laws provide secure retreat.
The humblest souls that e'er on heaven called,
Here sought the freedom which was there enthral'd,
Built up their altars as their conscience bade,
And found no Church, nor Tyrant to invade.
This happiness once tasted, now they find
No yearnings for the countries left behind;
But kindred souls and blood are won, t' increase
Their swelling numbers, and partake their peace.

Hail happy Village!  favourite of the west!
In thee our fond affections find their rest&mdash;
In thee the bright reality, that seemed
A phantom, tho' divinest Plato dreamed.
We see the basis, broad, and deeps and sure,
On which thy happiness may rest secure:
The government which equal laws restrain,
And no caprice can mingle with their reign:
Laws, that on nature and on reason rest,
Long tried, and sanctioned by Religion's test:
The wholesome customs, awed by fear divine
The decent manners, which the whole refine:
Plenty so full, that theft forgets to steal,
And lawless plunder can no motives feel;
And conscious peace, distending every breast,
Redoubled all, that neighbours too are blest;
And squalid want, emaciated care,
And wandering beggary are unknown there.
We ask not where thy happiness is found,
'Tis full and free, pervading all around.

There stands the INN &mdash; a lodge where Kings might rest;
And oft some exil'd King has been its guest;
Where wandering princes luxury might find,
Nor miss the Villas that they left behind.
There journeying merchants, yeomen of the soil,
And learned trav'lers oft relax their toil;
The rattling wheels bring in, at ev'ning time,
The tide of guests from ev'ry state and clime:
Rous'd by the porter, at the early dawn,
Refresh'd by sleep, again the tide rolls on.
No bloated landlord meets you at the door,
Whose rank excess steams forth at ev'ry pore;
No sooty bar-room there, on every side
With broken chairs and two-legg'd stools supplied;
Whose narrow windows but exclude the day,
If yet through cobwebs it might find its way;
Whose wainscot, from the ceiling to the floor,
With "strayed or stolen," or "stop thief," stuck o'er;
But splendid drawing rooms, with carpets strown,
And seats and sofas like the softest down.
The spacious halls where rich repasts are spread:
The dormitories, for each guest a bed;
The open walk &mdash; the cover'd colonnade,&mdash;
As cold or heat demands the sun or shade;
The parlor, where the harpsichord is found,
Soft-breathing flutes, or organ's nobler sound.
Cast o'er the guests your scrutinizing view&mdash;
No lounging, drinking, wrangling, bedlam's crew,
Where the stale song with witless toasts is crown'd,
And the loud horse-laugh and the slap goes round;
But minds well furnished, with experience fraught,
On high eventful times exchanging thought;
And sure the circling sun sees, from the skies,
No spot where themes of higher moment rise&mdash;
A people's glory risen &mdash; and rising yet,&mdash;
No splendor waning &mdash; and no glory set.

The village School &mdash; that scene of constant joy,
Where little pleasures flow and never cloy;
Where e'en the truant's current briskly flows,
Too strong and light for rods or tasks t' oppose.
The village school &mdash; an image fair and bright,
Welcom'd and wing'd with every new delight!
Life's starting goal &mdash; the struggle scarce begun&mdash;
While yet no race is lost, nor race is won&mdash;
Back to that source we trace the gilded show
In which the wealthy cit delights to glow;
For when a tyro, mid his fellows there,
He hoarded pins with unexampled care;
So the light insect that outshines the day,
Within the microscopic nit once lay.
Thither we trace the Statesman's lofty fame,
That Senates fear, and Nations joy to claim;
There first his lisping eloquence began,
There first he pleaded for the rights of man.
So the proud stream that swells the ocean's tide,
Flows from some trickling spring a leaf might bide.
The hero's bravery, at whose name and voice
Ten thousand firesides tremble or rejoice,
There felt its earliest glowings, to defend,
From petit tyranny, some injured friend.
So the strong fleet, that thunders round the earth,
From the nut's embryo bursted into birth.

The times are fled &mdash; and pedantry no more
Can pass for learning &mdash; dust for precious ore;
For rustic ignorance no more is found
To stand amaz'd at "words of thundering sound;"
And pedants fly the scene, nor longer dare,
With show of science, and with mystic air,
To teach in puzzles, what, if 'twere but true,
Is hid from pupil, and from master too.
See now the village master, in whose mind
The light of science has aris'n and shined;
Who leads the open faculties of youth,
By plain, direct, and easy paths, to truth.
The trust is sacred, pedants!  court it not,
Lest your false race should never be forgot.
Momentous trust to nurture and to bring
A Nation's glory from the budding spring.
Ah!  pamper'd, literary pride, avaunt!
Who, at those College Halls, would point the taunt;
Because, forsooth, his infancy was press'd
And fondled at some elder sister's breast.
Those recent walls will wipe away the crime
Of being new &mdash; do but allow them time.
What if, for want of nutritive supply,
Her sons, too early weaned, must haply hie
To life's broad common, and graze up their fare,
So sown with thorns &mdash; so bleak with chilling air?
Nay, what if ALMA MATER'S empty hands
Can send no favorite sons to foreign lands,
To seek fair Science, where she holds her court;
To gather arts where all the arts resort;
The Alps or Pyranees to clamber o'er,
Or carve their names on Padua's ancient door;
To ask the latest fashion of the faith,
Where creeds are form'd at each caprice's breath;
Then, like the laden bees, return once more,
T' enrich their country with their honeyed store?
Fond ALMA MATER!  what if nought beside
Some sidelong glance of love, thou canst provide
For e'en thy favorite sons?  yet why despair?
They hold the common earth, and common air:
And times may change, for change now rules the hour,
And sheds around the influence other power,
That e'en this plain reality exceeds
Creative fancy's wildest, noblest deeds;
And soon Mecaenases may rise, and shed
Their golden bounty over Learning's head.

Now to the decent Church our thoughts return,
Whither our willing feet have often borne,
When solemn themes mov'd our vibrating strings,
And hope was pregnant with immortal things.
'Tis not alone, that village prospects round,
Are fill'd and finish'd by that spire &mdash; and crown'd:
'Tis not alone the evidence that prayer,
And meek devotion, do not languish there;
A thousand prouder monuments may stand
Of wrested tithes from patient labour's hand;
Yet, with abated pleasure, freemen see
The loftiest piles, where not the heart is free;
'Tis this that clothes thy fabric with its charms,
The free-will offering &mdash; shed from bounty's arms.
In gilded domes proud prelates may be found,
To cheat the hungering soul, with unknown sound;
But nought can win us, or delights impart,
Save truth's free breast, and language of the heart.
In native dignity, thy preacher stands,
More than the dignity of robes and bands;
Nor needs a surplice to convince your mind
His head can teach, his life can lead mankind:
Nor seeks a sacred office he, to hide
An infidel's false heart, or worldling's pride;
Nor shows the crackling flames of fiery zeal,
The bigot's selfish feelings to conceal.
On superstition's aid he rests no claim,
To wake devotion, or increase its flame;
One word of wisdom awes with truer grace
Than Endor's dame, with all her sickly race.
No prude, to rail at fashions of the times,
And pick at peccadillos &mdash; while the crimes
That strike within, and deepest stains impart,
And damn the soul, scarce shock his tender heart:
No tyrant he, to rule the church with fear,
Nor lean upon her strength, to domineer:
When meek persuasion's force is fruitless seen,
His duty is discharg'd, his hands are clean.
His form and mien no sensualist betray,
Whose body o'er his soul usurps the sway;
Whose fair, smooth brow, and florid cheek declare,
No cure of souls, no love of learning there;
But comely paleness decent leanness, shew
The scholar's patience, and the pastor's too&mdash;
To him philosophy's best light has shined,
Not to bewilder and mislead his mind,
Not his warm love to chill, or to recall
From that High King "who ruleth over all,"
Nor plunge in Nature's causes, and refine,
To miss the traces of the hand Divine;
To push him on to doubt, and dark despair,
To feed his lambs with nature's stinted fare;
Tho' wise in nature, he on grace relies,
To lead his flock, and win them to the skies.

The heart's own bitterness &mdash; those secret woes,
That ask some genial bosom for repose&mdash;
There all within the faithful Pastor's breast,
Or private thoughts, or secret woes, may rest.
And when some stern calamity has riven
The sweetest ties of life that God has given,
Behold him then, still faithful to his trust,
Beside the mourner, sitting in the dust.
With cheerful face he meets each tender youth,
And drops upon his heart some welcome truth:
He cheers the aged onward, since the prize
Of immortality the nearer lies.
O'er bright prosperity, and fair success,
'Tis his pure joy, to lift the hand and bless;
Nor on life's comforts with disdain looks down,
Nor flies its pleasures with an anchoret's frown;
His presence oft to sparkling wit gives birth,
And brightens social life with chastened mirth:
The steadfast friend, when joy and plenty crown;
And still the friend, when want and sorrow frown.
He binds no burdens that he will not bear&mdash;
Prescribes no sacrifice he will not share;
The bright example of each precept given,
He rather leads, than points the way to heaven.
O!  when is rural happiness complete?
'Tis when the pious flock and preacher meet,
On sacred seasons, void of earthly care,
And pour devotion, in the house of prayer.

But see!  above, and onward, and around,
What scenes of village pleasure still abound!
The open hill, the wood beyond the glade,
The broken chasm the trickling brook has made:
There youth and age, and friends and lovers stray,
When o'er the scene the earliest zephyrs play.
The seats of living rock, the shady bower,
For summer's noon, or evening's balmy hour;
The boughs of Autumn, with their fruits o'erborne;
The golden promise of the ripening corn;
The thousand pleasures that relieve the night,
When winter suns too soon withdraw their light;
The youthful bands, with rural relish still,
Glide like the arrow down the ice-clad hill:
Their graver sires, who deeper interests feel,
In councils sitting, on the public weal;
Th' assembly's hall, where polished wit beguiles,
Or festive innocence presides and smiles;
The long processions o'er the frozen lakes,
And the light joy that winter's music wakes.
How have we seen the purest of delight,
Kindle and spread on many a bridal night!
Amidst the gay-dress'd group, the happy pair,
Smiled on by eager swain, and blushing fair;
The bridegroom, joyful that this day has come&mdash;
The bride still pressed with lingering thoughts of home&mdash;
Parental cares, so oft foreboding ill&mdash;
Parental hopes that bids those fears be still;
E'en wrinkled brows with smiles unwonted shine,
As in the sports of youth the grandsires join;
The reverend pastors fondly bent to call
Heaven's choicest blessings on his children all;
His hand not much conversant with the gold,
That children of this world intensely hold;
Pardon'd the more, if now his heart might be
Some trifle lighter for the marriage fee.

Hail!  sweetest village!  favourite of the west!
Again we hail thee, and pronounce thee blest.
Those vices foul that crowded cities fret,
Like leper's spots, have never reached thee yet.
No rising mobs within thy streets appear&mdash;
No bagnio's riot there salutes the ear:
Not the deep plans that bankrupts still contrive,
To cheat by law, as merchants fail and thrive.
Yet haply, too, some petit village pride
May mar thy peace, or ruffle its smooth tide:&mdash;
The village Miss, in lappets, gay display'd,
Looks scornful on the homelier hamlet maid;
Proud of the spire with which your church is crown'd;
Proud of the clock that tells the hours around;
Proud of your public buildings, walks, and squares;
Proud of your bustling market days and fairs;
Proud (and though vainer far than all beside,)
E'en of your Parson, cherishing your pride;
For oft he borrows from your vain conceit
Talents that ne'er in human bosoms meet.
And haply too, some competitions rise:&mdash;
Aspiring neighbours glance with jealous eyes;
Some rival sect, with zeal's ephemeral fire,
Plants on the neighouring hill its rival spire;
Some shame-faced scandal, creeping in the dark,
Some embryo malice, dying in the spark;
No more:  Those bitter gibes that oft provoke,
In prouder cities, the assassin's stroke,
And that false honor, tainted by a breath,
Leaping to desperation and to death,
Deform thee not; and if not spotless thou,
So heaven's bright orb has spots upon his brow.

Canst thou be happy, since midst thy throng
No nobles trail their retinue along?
Nor through thy streets the livened heralds fly,
And shout "his Majesty is coming by?"
Nor e'en the Peers', nor the Lord Mayor's suites,
Are dragg'd by slavish men along thy streets?
Nor demagogue, whose name a moment floats,
While yet his whiskey lasts, to buy your votes?
Nor manor broad, nor overgrown estate,
Nor princely castle, with its massy gate?
No formal feasts &mdash; no luxury refined&mdash;
Nor yet affected softness of the mind?
No hours of fashion that elude the light,
And turn the night to days and day to night?
Nor yet those Sunday feastings that desert
The church, and break an honest Pastor's heart?
Yes, thou art blest!  nor needest these false shows,
To gild corruption o'er, and hide thy woes.
And long may'st thou survive, and scape the bane
And snares and dangers that have others slain;
The rage of party, and ambition high,
Plethoric numbers, and rank luxury:
No earthquake shake thee from thy peaceful seat!
No ruptured mount o'erwhelm thee at his feet!
No stream, with altered courses, sweep thee far!
No Goths nor Vandals bring the torch of war!
Far be the time, if e'er high Heaven's decree
Shall yet award the fate of all to thee,
When all thy bright inhabitants shall die
And pil'd within thy cemeteries lie:
And happy fathers, long thy hope and guide,
And virtuous matrons, still thy boast and pride.
And sons, to copy those who go before,
And daughters seen in thee no more &mdash; no more!
Ne'er be the time, when o'er thy grassy bed
The pilgrim strangers shall inquiring tread,
And trace thee only by the crumbling bones,
The mound of earth, or the unletter'd stones;
As those dark millions unrecorded died,
Who sleep along the deep Missouri's side;
No!  thou hast lived in light, and still shalt live
That life that history's deathless page can give.
Then flourish fair, whilst heaven allots this part,
For thou hast pleasures to enchant the heart;
Thine are the pure delights, the solid charms,
That hold thy children fast within thine arms,
Attract the wanderer from the ocean side,
And many a pilgrim o'er th' Atlantic tide;
Whom timid friends on foreign shores would keep,
Or frighten back, with dangers of the deep,
With fancied images of savage men,
The rattling serpent, and the tiger's den.
And yet, once tasted, who thy sweets would spurn?
And who returns, or wishes to return?
From feudal lands are rural pleasure fled?
Are villages, once bright, decay'd and dead?
The busy population left the streets,
And, o'er the ocean, fixed in distant seats?
The walls o'erthrown, the well-set hedges broke,
The brooks, once bubbling, reeds and sedges choak?
Where now those people, there beheld no more?
Lo!  here &mdash; and busier &mdash; happier than before.

And thou, sweet POET!  who, in pensive strains,
Didst weep deserted AUBURN'S poor remains&mdash;
Mourn for the well-lov'd friends no longer found,
And wide-spread desolation all around;
Where thou hadst hoped that life's concluding day
Should gently fade, like summer's parting ray;
Lo!  here thy restless spirit, hovering o'er,
May find the AUBURN that was lost before.
Hail, happy bard!  thrice happy in thy theme;
For lamentations well the song beseem;
Whilst I, ill-fated bard, must toil, and sing
Such themes as thriving trade and business bring;
And strengthening walls, and the swift rattling wheels,
Smooth brow'd content, and laughter's loudest peals;
And wealth, reclining on her well-fill'd store;
And high repletion, that demands no more:
Such themes as scarce to poesy belong&mdash;
Themes that confound the melting strains of song:
Then hail!  thou wandering spirit, and be blest!
Rest!  sainted Poet &mdash; bard anointed &mdash; rest!
