Yet CHRISTMAS HOLIDAYS must sometime end;
And Time flies fleeter than the silver cloud
Which veils blue aether, when fresh joys inhales
Childhood, the promise of perpetual Spring.
Adieu ye hours, when all your toils were sports,
Nor frowning care was yours, nor trembling fear.

The dreaded day is come.  A sable dress
It wears, "BLACK MONDAY" call'd &mdash; But yesternight
The hand parental grasp'd the tender youth's,
And as the Father smil'd, Eugenio wept
In spite of hardiest resolution:
But yesternight the beauteous Caroline,
The festive gambol finish'd, in deep sigh
Spoke her love, more than in affected phrase
Or sentiment from novel delicate;
Her azure eyes suffus'd with pearly drops,
Her heart seem'd bursting with abstracted grief.

'Twas thus she said &mdash; "To-morrow he departs;
He, who oft begg'd, with intercession kind,
From tiresome task release, from tedious work;
Won from my mother the glad holiday;
Blithe flew our morning hours unperceiv'd,
Whether the walk engag'd, or frolic game,
Ah, where to-morrow will Eugenio play?
Stay, stay ye envious hours, nor bear him hence!
When I forget the boy &mdash; O!  may then my hand
Kind letters cease to hold, forget to write,
Nor burst due intercourse of written thought!
His image still shall float before my view;
His cares my own, and all his future joys.
Yet faithless Sancho plays in careless mirth,
Regardless of the dainty meal he'll lose,
And Master's kind caress &mdash; poor wretch begone!
Light be my brother's sleep, and may no dream
His senses vex, intent on this day's scene;
Sure care should not affect so good a mind."

The clothes were pack'd; the cake, the orange fruit,
Which with ripe fragrance scents wide Tajo's banks,
Or decks the shady groves of fertile Spain;
The idle top, the kite with pendent tail;
The ball and bat were laid within the trunk
By the fond Mother &mdash; last of all, the books.

Eager she left the task, resign'd the key
Which locks his newest clothes, and useful toys;
Important guard!  he smil'd amidst his tears.

Light was his sleep, and free from frightful dream;
When first the morning dawn'd, Eugenio rose,
Apart his Father fresh instruction pour'd,
Such as may deck his life with good men's praise;
Full swell'd his heart &mdash; the family sat sad,
And the long breakfast shar'd not wonted smiles.

Prudent in meals and generosity,
His aged Aunt then gave the promis'd kiss,
Slipp'd in her Nephew's hand the expected crown;
Her trembling nerves declar'd how much she felt.

In early years I miss'd my Mother's pray'r,
And Sister's kiss &mdash; Friend!  who could fill this blank?

Perhaps some inmate gives him kind advice
Ere the swift hour important steal away,
Precepts, which pious memory shall retain.
"In large Societies great virtues grow;
The Public School is still a rising State,
Where ancient laws inform obedient Youths,
While flourish fair Worth, Science, Courage, Truth.
And, trust me, Discipline can boast its use.
The Arts inform the mind, amend the state;
Dear Boy!  at school be covetous &mdash; of good;"
He smiles &mdash; "Rich treasure which will serve the mind:
Wise from example, fear contagious vice
See, how cheap Perditus is shunn'd by all;
Hence, as you love me, reverence yourself,
Wild passions temper, and dear hours improve."

Thus when confided to a foreign soil,
The pliant plant is rear'd, the blossoms fill.

The Coach stops at the gate.  Sad Thomas bears
Young Master's luggage, counselling all the way:&mdash;
"Larning, young Gentleman, 's a precious gift;
It was last week, I think, old Quilldrive said,
That you, Sir, was a rare good classic-um.
Fine Scholards breeds our Univarsities;
Aye, aye, the school-time's short; days speed apace,
And Age, ere long, will seize me in his clutch.
But with your leave, Sir, I've a word to say&mdash;
Your boat will take a coat of paint this Spring,
And ere the Easter Holidays come round,
Your poney in condition must be had.
Nay come, Sir, don't be down.  Your ground will bear
This year, I hope, a most amazing crop;
The garden when you're gone&mdash;" He could no more,
Striving in vain to stop unmanly tears,
Thomas in musing silence show'd concern.

Poor Sancho from low parlour-window sees
His Master slowly pacing o'er the lawn
Irresolute &mdash; Sancho, "the favourite dog,"
In tones instinctive speaks unusual moan,
'Till the house echoes with deep-lengthen'd howl.

Meantime our Youth, content with inside place,
Nor aims to drive the steeds, nor guide the reins;
Often repeats a long, a long adieu;
Then waves his hand, and wraps himself in thought.
Still slowly trot the steeds; yet blames he not
Their progress, deeming wise the Friar's say,
Which late he heard at one of Shakespeare's Plays&mdash;
"Wisely resolv'd, they stumble that run fast."

He from coach-window views the leafless hedge;
Sharp beats the patt'ring rain against the glass;
The busy half-way house to him recalls
Afresh domestic scenes and transient joys.

The coach proceeds, and dullest hours fly fast;
He takes his seat:  the passengers are strange,
The town seems sad, the market-place is thin;
Then flows the pious tear, heart-breaking sigh,
Then does he envy those who freedom claim.

Yet he is rich, and trifles dear to him
Can soothe his pain.  Ev'n now he plans his schemes
And future sports:  wise counts his hoarded gold,
Or cons his Juliet's gift, gilt pocket-book,
Which notes the months and days till Easter come.
Let not the wise deride the School-boy's tears;
Such was the grief which tender Ovid felt,
Banish'd to Scythia's snows, and far from Rome;
Far from his wife, kind converse of his friends.
Such tender ties conquer'd stern Marcius, him
Whom not Rome's legions or her humbled state
Could soften.  Thoughts like these might 'chance have touch'd
Leonidas, when at the narrow pass,
The proud barbarian troop of Persia's King
He check'd, by patriot death acquiring fame
Immortal.  In the dank marsh Marius sat
Exile from Rome, there thought of pristine joys.
Thus good Macduff ceas'd for a time to weep
O'er Scotia's woes, when told his family
Were murder'd by the treacherous Thane's command,
His hat pull'd o'er his brow, he sighing cried,
"I cannot but remember such things were."

But do not, gentle youth, indulge in tears,
For pious care may hurt the feeling mind!
Thrice happy, did you know your father's love,
Or could foretell your mother's kind regard!
What!  would they banish him, on whom they doat?
Did they not know, that learning blessings yields,
Which far exceed the ills by absence caus'd,
Their wish your welfare, and your good their hope!
For learn that science meliorates the heart,
Gains just preferment from the virtuous State.
The young Telemachus, in parent's place,
Mentor found, who wisest lessons taught,
Impartial truth, and firmest principles.

But when at School &mdash; day comes not after day
As wave succeeds each wave:  for learned toil
Yields pleasure, and improves the docile mind,
He Pyramus bewails, fair Thisbe's death
Follows Aeneas through his bard campaigns;
At Lydia's quarrels smiles, her Poet's love
Treasures his moral rules:  Davus applauds;
Soul-thrill'd, admires duteous Pamphilus;
Laughs at keen jokes of artful Parasite;
Now weeps brave Hector's death and Ilium's grief;
Now loves the virtues of the Persian Prince:
'Chance Lucian pleases.  He can verses form
In spondee, or in dactyl musical;
Quoting from Horace, or the Mantuan Bard,
He learns to copy great authorities,
And climbs Parnassus with a gradual step
Or, emulous of praise, grave essays writes,
An Epictetus, save in length of beard!
From primitives seeks derivative words
In crabbed work of lexicographer.

'Tis his, dear Youth, while age invites, to drink
From Fancy's spring, which, bubbling from pure fount,
Dances the plants among, and vernal meads;
'Tis his to taste the choice but healthful feast,
Where the mind wonders at ingrafted shoots,
Rich Spring bears Summer's fruits.

Grave hours are follow'd by the Holiday:
'Tis then he skilful shoots the bounding taw,
Or drives the circling hoop with fancy's aid;
Or at quick prison-bars acquires great fame,
The appointed leader of some chosen men;
Now sets the prisoner from his thraldom free,
Now on the enemy dire vengeance dares,
Bold as Achilles, and as swift of foot.
Or in thy fields, green Eton, o'er the ground,
With dext'rous foot, drives the unwieldy ball,
Impetuous, panting for well-guarded goal:
Athenian wit disdains not Spartan sports.

All-powerful custom rules.  It is not time
Or season fit, with skill to row the skiff
Near Cluer's bank, which lofty Windsor views,
Imperial residence of George the Good.

Historians tell of Monarchs fam'd for worth
And Piety &mdash; Great Alfred crowns the list;
In war most dreadful, but in peace most mild;
Who with the feeble Pilgrim shar'd his loaf,
Enrich'd fair Oxford, seat of rising arts,
His subjects love, the dread of barb'rous Danes.
Our Cambridge, pious Henry's name transmits
With grateful honours to posterity;
For learning fam'd, and for religious men,
His College stands the wonder of the world.
Christchurch survives, important legacy,
Worthy of Edward the Munificent.
But foreign climes shall praise our patriot King&mdash;
Humane, religious, affable, and just.

Be careful, Boy, of time, for much depends
In public life, if rules are well preserv'd.

Grave truths, sublimer strains than these deserve,
And bold the task important truths to tell,
Such as of old inspired Hebrews penn'd,
Such as Isaiah told, and David sung.
The sceptic mind with equal reason doubts,
That Rome was sway'd by the First Caesar's line,
As that a Prophet, King, and Priest was born.
Rather lay by on shelves fictitious odes,
Which warbling harp might tune to modern song,
Than doubt these sacred truths.  Each printed pledge,
Each document of sage Historian
In desk immure, or in the wire-wove case,
Not truths superior to all sordid gain.

But look abroad, existing proofs remain,
Which Jews might fear, Mahometans adore;
A scatter'd nation wand'ring from their God,
The scoff of Christendom, and hate of Man,
Blind Hebrews wail their land without a name.
'Chance one less harden'd, when dark evening sets,
His casement barr'd, and safe from rabble shout,
May contrite weep, while flows the patriot tear,
Weak Pilate's partial doom and curse fulfill'd.
And Babylon with blood of martyrs red,
She, that was great, the lady nicely fed,
Weeps her proud mitre scorn'd, in ashes sits.

Burst into sounds of joy, and holy hymn,
His endless virtues merit endless praise,
For us Messiah liv'd, for us has died.

His precepts follow:  if the stranger thirst,
Pour forth from copious stores libation rich,
The Cup of Mercy soon shall glad thy heart.
Give to him bread, on promis'd viands feast,
Impart to him, if poor, a useful mite;
More lasting treasures gain, compar'd to which
The gold of Mexico is fragile dust.

And oft, kind Youth, when on the downy bed,
Ere yet thine eyes invite most willing sleep,
When loud the tempest howls, think on the roof,
Where through the broken tiles the chill snow drops,
Where the poor labourer eats his scanty meal,
And scarcely dares to take required rest
For fear his wife may want, his nurseling starve;
At morn determine to relieve their wants,
And God with precious gifts shall make thee rich,
Fair Christian Faith shall guide thy wayward steps.

By the fond love which links the social chain,
By all thy cares, my own, dear Youth, forbear,
(Whoe'er thou art, who 'chance may read my lay),
To tempt the snares of new Philosophy,
Pregnant with mischief, unsubstantiate;
In baseless sands the found'ring vessel sinks.
Dare to be good, though callous fashion smile;
Strong with these truths, if in the voyage through life
In gilded bark thou'lt venture from the coast,
And credulous exult on smiling seas,
Though storms arise, and clouds of mischief form,
Though the hoarse surge may rage with dire dismay,
Ev'n though thy stouter vessel's heart-ribs crack,
Ev'n though the painted prow, be wash'd with waves,
Truth, Heaven's bright Seraph, pilots to a port,
Where comfort waits the mourning prodigal,
In splendid realms our Father greets his Son.
