LUCY.
Why thus beneath this wither'd cypress shade,
All lost in thought, is my Cleora laid?
Why does thy tender flock neglected stand,
And bleating waits, in vain, thy gentle hand?
The fragrant bower, that you so late adorn'd,
Now fades and looks as if, for you, it mourn'd;
The springing flowers, in your absence, fade,
Oh say what sorrows vex the tender breast,
Why is Cleora thus with grief opprest?
Let us together to yon grotto go,
There tell the cause that makes these sorrows flow;
The counsel of thy friend may ease thy tears,
I'll share thy grief, and try to soothe thy cares.
&mdash;The lonely nymphs her mournful silence broke,
Rais'd her dejected head, and thus she spoke:&mdash;

CLEORA.
'Tis Damon's loss that causes all my grief,
And, in his absence, what can give relief?
Let the blue violet and the woodbine fade,
And the pale lilly hang its sickly head,
The blushing damask rose forget to bloom,
And jessamy no more shall shed perfume.
What pleasure can the mournful bower boast,
Since the dear swain, for whom 'twas rear'd, is lost?
Damon, the joy of all the tender maids,
The loveliest youth that ever bless'd the shades,
Dost thou not know the blooming constant swain,
Dost thou not know, that he has left the plain?
And canst thou ask me, why I'm thus opprest?
Is love a stranger to my Lucy's breast?

LUCY.
My breast with friendship's pleasing fires is warm'd,
With treach'rous love can never more be charm'd;
Ah, warn'd by me, shun the inconstant sex;
True, they may charm, but never fail to vex;
Uneasy, restless love our peace destroys,
Then surely friendship yields superior joys;
No rising doubts, nor jealous cares, molest
The nymph that to calm friendship yields her breast.
Alternate torment rakes the wounded heart,
That yields to love, with never-ending smart;
The fickle mind of man for ever strays,
Ne'er fix'd to one, but roves a thousand ways.
Should some new nymph, with fatal power rise,
And fairer seem than you, in Damon's eyes;
How would you pine, and, struggling with your chain,
Would strive to hate, but always strive in vain;
Then, sadly sighing say, I ne'er had griev'd,
If, like my Lucy, I had ne'er believ'd.

CLEORA.
But from my Damon I no change can fear;
Mild are his manners, and his soul sincere;
The love I bear him plays about my heart,
A lambent flame that warms, and gives no smart.
Tis fix'd as fate, I've no desire to range,
Till in my Damon I perceive a change;
And should I find it, should the lovely youth
Leave me to mourn his vows and broken truth;
I'll waste my days in some sad lone retreat,
While he is sighing at another's feet;
Then, not till then, my Lucy, shall I prove
That friendship ought to be preferr'd to love.

LUCY.
Cease the dispute, the silent grotto wears
A darker shade, and sable night appears
Courting repose &mdash; Here may we make our beds,
And on these mossy pillows rest our heads;
May the kind Gods our wishes both approve,
Bless me with friendship, and bless you with love.
