Now summer displays her gay charms,
And pleasure abounds on the plain;
No mischief our shepherds alarms,
But blithe is each nymph with her swain;
While innocence, virtue, and truth
Bedeck the fair nymphs of the green;
And modesty, beauty, and youth
On every brow may be seen.

But Thirsis is coming this way;
See, pensiveness dwells on his brow!
I prithee, swain, what can dismay,
Or cause that uneasiness now?
All nature is blithesome and gay,
Then why wilt thou only be sad?
Drive sorrow, young shepherd, away,
Like us be delightful and glad.

THIRSIS.
Peace, Damon, peace &mdash; nor thus distract my heart;
I feel &mdash; already feel the keenest smart.&mdash;
Advise me not to gladness and delight,
Since lovely Laura's ravish'd from my sight.
She's gone!  Distracting thought!  my Laura's fled,
And mould'ring lies amongst the silent dead!&mdash;
Why, tyrant Death!  didst thou deprive the earth
Of so much virtue, innocence, and worth?

DAMON.
Is Laura gone? &mdash; and could not Death forbear;
O could he not our lovely Laura spare!
Ah, Thyrsis!  all our shepherds will lament
The fatal time that Death his jav'lin sent;
The fatal hour that robb'd our peaceful plain
Of her for whom we ever shall retain,
Deep in our breasts, a sad rememb'ring pain.
Our usual sports will quite be out of date,
When I with deepest sorrow shall relate
Unto our nymphs and swains this cruel stroke of fate.

THIRSIS.
What earthly blessing can my loss retrieve!
E'en things inanimate will surely grieve.
Behold, as conscious of the mournful tale,
The heifers cease to graze in yonder vale;
Less pleasing glides along the purling rill;
Our flocks more pensive look on yonder hill;
The feather'd race, with less harmonious notes,
A mournful knowledge of our loss denotes.
But what of this &mdash; can Heav'n &mdash; can earth divine
A mortal's sorrow &mdash; that compares with mine!

DAMON.
Full well, my Thirsis, do I know that rest
And peace is banish'd from thy woeful breast;
Full well I know how well thou lov'dst the fair,
But still would wish thee to resist despair:
'Twas Heav'n itself that gave the fatal blow,
And resignation to the Gods we owe.

THIRSIS.
Admit thy counsel, still must I resign
Without one pang, a soul so dear to mine?
What!  what!  inducement, Death, could urge thy dart
To stagnate life's gay bloom thro' Laura's heart?
She might, she surely might, have longer liv'd,
The Gods had not so soon &mdash; her fate decreed.
Unhappy me!  that e'er indulgent Heav'n
So fair an angel to our plains had giv'n;
Yet more unhappy that I lov'd so well,
Ador'd so soon &mdash; and she so early fell.
O Death, what triumph has thy arm display'd;
To me what torture has thy dart convey'd!

DAMON.
'Tis true, my Thirsis, thro' our verdant plain
In ev'ry bosom pensiveness will reign;
'Tis true, our greatest ornament is gone;
Who late unrivall'd at our pastimes shone;
Nor could her innocence or virtue move
Tyrannic Death to spare thy tender love;
But, being gone beyond redemption, spare
This weighty grief &mdash; this unavailing care.
Tho' hard I know &mdash; yet hapless shepherd, do
At least attempt thy sorrows to subdue.
See, Mira comes!  and lo!  the distant fields
A chearful gladness at her presence yields.

MIRA.
What means this sorrow, Damon!  Thirsis tell
Why tolls with doleful notes &mdash; the passing bell?
A gen'ral sadness and dejection reigns
Within the bosoms of our youthful swains:
With chearful airs of late they skipp'd along,
And pleasure only sway'd the rural throng;
But, strange reverse! &mdash; ungentle fate has now
Impress'd despair and grief on ev'ry brow.

THIRSIS.
On me has Fortune all her malice try'd,
And ev'ry future hope of bliss deny'd!
Methinks in me the cause you might have read,
For know &mdash; oh wretched sound!  my Laura's dead!
Would you, fair maid, denote you soul sincere,
Forget your mirth, and drop a friendly tear.
From me, henceforth &mdash; our rural sports and play
To other plains be banish'd far away:
More welcome now the melancholy glade,
And contemplation in the lonely shade;
To yonder grove my inclination bends,
Where soft compassion formless echo lends:
Fancy shall paint her in each nightly dream,
Each day with care I'll carve her lovely name:
When dead &mdash; my corpse in Laura's grave inhume,
With this undress'd inscription on my tomb:&mdash;
"Here lies a youth, that lov'd sincere and true,
Who left the world his Laura to pursue:
Thy pleasures, Earth, and all thy cares, adieu!
