Flush'd with Hesperia's golden prey,
When Gallia northward bent her way,
Eager to stretch her desolating brand
O'er the rich vales of happy Switzerland;
From beneath the piny steep,
Where he lay in slumber deep,
Lull'd by the water's tuneful fall,
And the goatherd's madrigal,
Sudden Helvetia's guardian Genius sprang;
High on Adula's rock he fix'd his stand,
And clash'd his shield, and wav'd his banner'd hand,
And thus his war-song sang.

"Rise, my warriors! &mdash; see, advance
The legions of perfidious France!
Onward she bids the gathering tempest roll,
Peace on her brow, but rancour in her soul.
She envies us our upland gales,
The treasures of our peaceful vales,
The beechen grove, the sloping hill,
Fresh with many a vernal rill,
With many a simple spire and cottage grac'd;
Fain would she scatter from her venom'd breath
Over this pleasant land the seeds of death,
And for our blooming Eden leave a hideous waste.

"And shall she? &mdash; no, my warriors, no!
Though the proud insulting foe
Full wide her conquering banners have unfurl'd
O'er half the nations of the prostrate world;&mdash;
Hath she yet storm'd the mountain-rock,
And stemm'd the mountain-torrent's shock,
And scal'd the beetling precipice,
Barrier'd with eternal ice?
Warriors, hath she yet essay'd
The fury of the freeman's blade,
Of souls resolv'd to conquer or to die?&mdash;
Then, Switzers, rise!  each his stout breast-plate gird,
And each unsheath his blood-incrusted sword,
And rear his nervous arm, and strike for liberty."

He spake:  obedient to the sound
Helvetia's warriors throng'd around.
Rous'd by the cry of long-forgotten war,
From the swift Limmat, and majestic Ar,
From where to the morning shine
The torrents of the infant Rhine;
And wintry Rhone's tumultuous tide
Cleaves the Forked-Mountain's side;
Hasli, from thy lovely dell
From thy green lulls, O Appenzell;
From the forest-crowned mere,
Where the hardy mountaineer
Chaunts the high feats of his compatriot Tell;

They hear the spirit-stirring call:
They burn to meet the' invading Gaul:
"Give us the foe!" they shout amain.
"'Tis well;" the guardian Genius cries again:
"Such the port in days of yore,
Warriors, your forefathers bore;
Thus 'gainst many a giant foe,
They whirl'd the ax, and bent the bow.
Then the bull and sable bear
Together swept the ranks of war,
And Union led the way to victory:
This quench'd the fury of the Austrian sword,
This crush'd the might of bold Burgundia's Lord,
This chas'd proud Gallia's kings, this made our country free.

"Switzers, in virtue as in name,
Emulate your father's fame;
Hark to your common country's sacred call,
And on your common foe with force united fall!
So may the songs of future days
You to your fathers' glory raise!
Again may conquest crown your ranks
On rapid Birsa's holy banks,
By Naefel's rocks, and green Morgarten's plain
Granson again, and viny Morat see
Their waves, blood-stain'd with Gallic Chivalry,
And Freedom, still unmov'd, her Alpine throne maintain.

"But if distrust and jealous fear
Have shed their baneful influence here,
Hence!  bow the standard, quit the marshall'd field,
And your sweet vales a bloodless conquest yield!
Lest, when ye sink in short-liv'd light,
As sink ye must, to Gallia's might,
Thus the surrounding nations cry,
'See where the mountain-heroes lie
An easy prey to the invading foe:&mdash;
Though many a patriot hand the javelin rais'd,
And many a heart with patriot ardour blaz'd,
Dissension quench'd the flame, and nerveless fell the blow!'

"Insulting France shall join her voice,
And bid each prostrate clan 'rejoice,'
And shout, when heaviest weighs her iron hand,
'Hail, seat of Freedom, envied Switzerland!'
Meanwhile shalt thou, poor country, bleeding lie,
And though, to break thy slavery,
Thy chiefs again the war-song rear,
Again thy warriors grasp the spear;
Not all thy force united then shall save:&mdash;
In vain shalt thou gnaw thy reluctant chain,
Thy chieftains call, thy warriors arm in vain;
Gallia must triumph still, and thou be still a slave!"
