The Christmas Holidays, at length, are come;
On shelves the books are laid aside; eras'd
The notches from the board, of days, and months,
And even number'd hours, the School-boy leaves
How willingly his school!  He dares the time
Anticipate (sensation exquisite!)
In which he'll share parental tenderness.
Blest be the thoughts they spring from moral cause.

Now on his journey home &mdash; from Coachman's box,
While prospects rise, as breaks the morning's sun,
He views the upland slope, the fallow field,
The frozen lake with venturous skaiters throng'd;
The distant spires, which mark the country town.
And now the turnpike gate; the market-place,
Where housewives cheapen wares, while hucksters jeer;
Where buxom dames clean barn-door poultry sell,
And farmers meet, and village quidnuncs throng;
Pork, fowls, eggs, corn, news, swell the busy hum.
Let Heroes fam'd pursue unceasing war;
Wiser, though tempted, on commanding post
He holds a truce; nor wars with proudest mart,
From per'lous pea-shooter, where swineherds threat!
He sees the shops well stock'd, a goodly show;
The porter ashes o'er the foot-path strews:
Here the brisk maid, in russet garment clad,
At the house-door pursues her morning task,
Kneeling, most diligent; from pail and scrub
Just steals a look to see the School-boy pass,
To cheer him with a smile.  Here milkmaids ply,
And chalk the lengthen'd score:  And certes, Sirs,
Fastidious appetites might taste such cream
Fresh from the brindled cow.  In spacious square
Rumbles the Telegraph &mdash; the vulgar gaze&mdash;
Nor stops till where the Bell notes larder full,
Where landlord bows, most conversant of time.

White passengers their hasty breakfast share,
Let it not wonder move, if youth disdains
(Youth, which on intellectual banquet feasts)
Coffee, or butter'd toast, or streaked ham,
Or even new-laid eggs.  Can he regale
Or feed the grosser sense, whose heart is full,
While throbs desire with unceasing hope?

The horses chang'd, oft summon'd passengers
Resume their seats &mdash; bold mounts the hopeful fare
The social box, while deep the Coachman sits
As one intent on learning something new,
Complacent to his fellow-traveller,
And grows more wise  from "really wond'rous" tale.
Sluggish the loaded coach drags on the road,
Drawn by sure-footed horses, be it true,
Which once my grandam told me, "slow is sure."
Delays augment the hope which youth creates:
Our records show that striplings grasp command&mdash;
Yet, can ambition dwell in School-boys breasts?
What will not money gain?  With taper thong,
And imitative voice, he drives the steeds,
Not wing'd, I deem, or on ambrosia fed;
Such as, with fancy rich, Dan Ovid sung.
No age, save youth, would purchase such a toil.
Yet oft the Coachman checks his eager rage,
And oft with timely caution takes the reins.
Ah!  could the horses fly as swift as hope,
Which youthful fancy breeds, the prints scarce left
On sands, short dream the journey would appear.
As knights of former centuries beheld,
From far, 'midst trees, the hospitable gate
Of Castle, so our Youth discerns the home
For which he sigh'd, oft sicken'd at the thought.

The journey finish'd, fraught with joy and hope,
The reins resign'd, and wonted shilling paid,
Lo Thomas, waiting at the well-known door,
Fellow of wond'rous merriment &mdash; who bowls,
Or keeps a wicket safer?  Who more able
Guides th' aerial kite, or rules the helm
As the light skiff the yielding waters cleaves,
Her side inclining to the stream?  his wish
To please, and time beguile with pastime new,
Proud if young Master should commend his taste.
So young shall he repine?  The morn of life
Plays round his heart, and chuckles in his face.

He enters with a gladsome heart, I ween,
Feeling fresh pleasures, sweeter from disuse;
His Parents greet him, with a tender smile.
Perhaps the Mother shrewdly may remark,
Pressing Eugenio to her throbbing breast,
He's much improv'd in manners, stature, height,
And beauty.  His sweet Sisters too survey
Their brother, whilst he, proudly, tales recites
Of wanton freaks at school, of tiresome tasks,
Wisely concealing those which censure met,
Or direful punishment from Doctor's hand.
The house no longer dull &mdash; his fav'rite dog,
Sleek-coated Sancho, sprung from lineage pure,
Sues for admittance at the parlour-door,
Importunate, and yelps his noisy joy,
Climbs on his Master, fondly licks the hand
Which tempers chastisement and choice rewards,
Then cries aloud, and frisks in wanton mood.

And well the Fire-side here demands my song&mdash;
A Family, sweet picture, drest in smiles
And glad content.  The tea-urn now remov'd,
The Royal game of Goose, or Drafts, succeed;
Then 'chance the tale delights, or festive game
Yclep'd the Christmas Gambol.  Mirth laughs loud.

Meantime the Mother plans some festival,
Which may afford delight, the comic play,
Or pantomime, where, by her lover clasp'd,
Blithe Columbine trips lightly, and the Sage,
Her father, with a dagger arm'd, and deck'd
In scarlet, follows, nor does Scaramouch,
Oft beaten, (luckless wight, and tell-tale knave!)
Fail of attracting laughter.  Shouts, applause,
From Gallery, and Pit, and Box, commend
The feats of scene-commanding Harlequin.

The look'd-for eve is come &mdash; cheering Twelfth-night.
The Company are met &mdash; from jetty stove
The social fire casts enlivening heat,
While choicest Cake is prais'd by jocund tribe.
Our young Friend draws his lot, though fears forebode;
Great hopes may fail!  What then? &mdash; he bears a jest,
Who laughs at innocent and quaint sirname.
The scheme is fair "All Prizes and no Blanks!"
Lo!  Tom the Giant-Killer shares large prize.
Health to the King, and length of prosp'rous days!
If I, your Counsellor, your friend, may speak,
Dread Sir!  on subjects lay impartial fines!
Reign, like our Monarch, in your subjects love.
Punch, wine, delicious cake, fruit, capillaire,
Cards, may this festive night indulge good boys,
And lovely girls may chat.  Dear!  who could think
The clock must strike too soon!  Yet Thomas brings
News! &mdash; On the table spread, light supper waits.

Oh, I have known such hours!  I too have shar'd
Such heartfelt joys!  Say can there be a time
Which gives more pleasures, or more bliss imparts,
Unmixt with care?  Use these while youth permits;
For soon, sweet Boy, you'll know yourself a Man.
Then, proud disdain, or love, or human grief,
Alternate reign; chance, madness &mdash; such is life&mdash;
Whose raging ills no medicine can heal,
Terrific, desolates the mind.  Snatch then
The roses, which in spring of life bloom fresh,
And, redolent of health, diffuse their sweets.
Ev'n now the year rolls on, and storms arise,
Sorrow, portending misery and tears!

Ah me!  sore destin'd to encounter cares,
As on the scenes that were, fond Memory dwells,
My joys, more shortliv'd than Ephemera,
Pass'd ere meridian sun had shod his rays.

Still Wisdom answers, that each proper cause
Is suited to the end.  Hence sceptic Doubt,
Avaunt with all thy idle fantasies!
Those blessings which are lost I'll use in trust,
Then let the evil fall, whene'er it may;
And happy he, most virtuous of his race,
Who patiently each trial undergoes,
And bears with equal mind each human grief;
Him on the couch of sickness joy can cheer;
By faith in darkness trimm'd the lamp of life.
Bland heaven lies open to a mortal's view.
