Cease!  Memory!  cease!  nor longer thus recall
The sad yet dear remembrance of those days,
Those blissful days of Love and Joy, when all
Of Life and Light were valued, but to gaze
With rapture on those eyes, where the bright blaze
Of Heaven's own glory shone, and their clear beam
Was like some starlet's bright and lovely rays,
Glowing with such soft splendour, that they seem
E'en yet but half extinguished, like some fairy dream.

Oh!  'twas a feeling holy, chaste, and pure,
That warm'd my breast towards thee, for thou wast
Like some fair vision sent on earth, to lure
All hearts to love and virtue, or to cast
A gladdening Halo round, a sweet foretaste
Of Heaven and heavenly joys, for o'er thy face
An Angel Glory gleam'd, too fair to last,&mdash;
And it was what no pencil e'er could trace,
'Twas Nature's masterpiece, the seat of every grace.

I might not deem thee mortal, for to me
The while I gazed on thee with fixed eye,
Thou seemd'st so pure, so fair, as not to be
A Denizen of earth, but from on high,
A Seraph Power, an Essence of the sky&mdash;
And I did worship thee with fervent zeal,
And adoration holy, nor can I
Tell what it was did o'er my senses steal,
'Twas what I ne'er had felt, nor deem'd I e'er could feel.

And art thou gone for ever? &mdash; Then no more,
Sweet Saint, no more with joy this heart must bound,
Oh that its sorrows and its griefs were o'er,
That it were cold and still, far, far beyond
The attacks of scorn and malice, and the sound
Of loud-voiced calumny, &mdash; and freed from care,
Would it were buried with thee in that mound
Where all my pleasures, hopes, and wishes are;&mdash;
Than live in dark despair, oh!  it were better far.

Speak not to me of comfort!  is there one
On all this earth's wide surface, so oppress'd,
So wretched as I am?  No!  there is none&mdash;
But, ah!  what feelings soothe my anxious breast,
And whisper, "Mourn not, for there is a rest
For hearts like thine with grief and sorrow riven:"
There, sainted Spirit, art thou happy &mdash; blest!
Then let this "holy Hope to Faith be given,"
That tho' we part on Earth, we soon shall meet in Heaven.
