"There lies thy destin'd path, ascending still!
Be now its varied steep with care essay'd&mdash;
Here sinks a vale, there swells a breezy hill;
Now is the tangled way obscured by shade:
And now, far-opening glades the fancy fill;
There, poisonous fogs and chilling damps descend,
Here, balmy dews from roseate bowers distil:
Lo!  as Life's gayest prospects wide extend,
O falsely think not thou, they ne'er shall end!

"This beauteous height attain'd, thy feet must trace
A downward path which leads to realms unknown:
That solemn path no verdant arbours grace;
But if thou dost not tread its steep alone,
If still attended on that dreary place
By the sweet angels of unblemish'd deeds,
Their blest discourse will every ill efface,
Their shining light will turn sad Nature's weeds
To heavenly garments rich, which Fancy's woof exceeds."

Thus spoke Experience, while his sturdy hand
Disclos'd to ardent youth, the track of life.
Well knew the sage, that specious fairy-land,
And well he knew that sky with storm was rife,
Which now, the Spring's first zephyr lightly fann'd;
Fain would his warning voice fond youth prepare
For ruffian Auster's devastating band;
And fain instruct, how best swift change to bear
Of rocks, and wilds, and wastes, from jocund landscape fair.

But all-enraptur'd with the boundless scene,
Youth's eager eyes ran wildly o'er the view:
He thought the groves all dress'd in deathless green,
The azure heaven in never-changing blue,
Nor deem'd that cloud could stain that dazzling sheen,
Nor wintry frost that verdant foliage shed:
Reckless of future gloom, and tempest keen,
He long'd the various path alone to tread,
And scale with mounting foot, the steepest upland's head.

"O beauteous scene!" he cried, with fond delight,
"O paradise of joy, for ever fair!
Thy varied charms my willing feet invite,
And court my soul to bathe in Heaven's own air.&mdash;
I come to bask beneath thy sunshine bright,
To quaff sweet pleasure from her purest rill;
'Mid fragrant flowers, and tuneful birds, by light
Of cloudless aim or moon, to wander still,
And rapt in grateful trance, with bliss and wonder thrill!

"I come to find amid your green retreats,
The forms august, of Virtue, and of Truth:
Honour unstain'd, whose heart still equal beats
In oft-impairing age, as zealous youth;
All Learning's stores, and blest Affection's sweets;
Religion's precious balm, and Pity's dew;
Hope's cheering strain which now my glad ear greets,
And lovelier makes the distant scenes we view.
I come to find all this; instructor dear, adieu!"

"Stay, stay rash boy!  ere yet thy headlong haste
Hurry thee on, from my long-guiding hand:
Rightly behold the view so falsely traced
By thy enchanted eyes, and Fancy's wand.
Alas!  'tis not in fact, thus nobly graced!
But thine the task to prove its fleeting smile.
Yet go not thou, 'till thy free choice be placed
On guide and sharer of thy journey's toil,
Whose wise and tender care may half its ills beguile.

"What see'st thou now? &mdash; two different forms, I ween;
Gay Fancy there; here Reason, goddess grave!
Observe them well, and make slow choice between;
For leading guide one only canst thou have.&mdash;
Ah me!  how passing fair is Fancy's mien!
What dazzling structures at her glance arise!
How spreads she o'er the rocks resplendent green;
And bids from sulph'rous pits fresh flow'rets rise,
While Nature's truer tints are lost in her gay dyes!

"In yon high dome thou may'st the sorceress note,
'Mid crowds, and gems, and light, and music rare;
Visions poetic, round her proud throne float,
Fanning with Iris wing, her bosom fair.
No sight of care, no sound howe'er remote,
May e'er invade that scene of baseless joy;
Each heart beguiled, to future pains devote,
Bounds to their Syren-Queen's false prophecy.
Bidding each warning thought to sullen Lethe hie.

"O trust her not, my son! &mdash; if such thy guide,
Thy transient path may lay thro' Eden's bowers,
Smoothly awhile those early days may glide;
But Time's sure grasp will wither all the flowers,
Which round thy brow her wanton hands have tied:
At his approach, her phantom form will fade,
And left alone each rising storm to bide,
Thy trusting soul shall own itself betray'd,
And call, alas!  too late, on Truth and Reason's aid.&mdash;

"See!  how she points to where a shining heap
Of gold, and costly robes, and jewels shine!
Now springing on, she leads to Fame's bright steep,
And proffers Glory's wreath, a meed divine!
There, shews thee sacred bliss, where Passions sleep,
And nought is waking but the heart's best glow,
The Lover's, Husband's, Father's fondness deep,
With each delight man's varied duties know;
All these, in empty boast, she offers to bestow.

"But trust her not:  if such thy vain belief,
Sad disappointment for thy portion waits:
Man's checquer'd lot hath little joy, much grief,
And keen Despair will rend whom Hope elates.
As sure as Autumn's blast doth sear the leaf,
Do youth's gay wanderings end in darkest shade,
Unless from Fancy's guidance, false as brief,
He timely turn, and seek that steadfast maid
By whose unbending arm, the frailest form is staid.

"My son, why hangs thy gaze on that fair sprite
Which now the syren to thy view displays?
She seems to thee, the angel pure and bright,
Of faithful love, ordain'd to bless thy days:
But Vanity her name; no falser wight
Roams o'er the world:  in artful mask she goes;
Love's self she seems, so ably is the dight,
So well her painted cheek can mock its rose,
So cunningly her hand the shadowing mantle throws.

"Hark to her voice, how sweet is its behest!
List to her sighs, how tenderly they flow:
Who would not think they rose from Loves own breast?
(Alas!  can ear untaught, the diff'rence know?)
But O beware!  if to thy bosom pressed,
The wily fiend will warble witching by;
Then while her faithless beauties are caressed,
With iron fang will tear thy heart away,
And on its quiv'ring flesh, and gushing life's-blood prey.

"Hence Fancy then, with all thy dangerous crew!
Turn thee, my son, at Reason's sober voice.&mdash;
Tho' all alone she stands before thy view,
Pause not, but on the maid affix thy choice.
The closer seen, the fairer is her hue,
No cloud deforms her brow, nor dims her eye;
The morning sun that dries up nature's dew,
Bids not so soon each wildering vapour fly,
Or shines with steadier light, or nobler brilliancy!

"Slow and august her step; with look serene,
Safe will she lead thee thro' each dark defile;
Her powerful hand will smooth the way between,
Her holy converse rap thy soul the while;
Secure on her thy trusting heart may lean,
Tho' dark and difficult the steep may frown;
She ne'er will guide where foot hath never been,
But o'er a well-tried track will lead thee down,
Till home, and rest, and peace, your mutual labours crown!

"To mock reality with fatal shews,
No wand she holds, changing foul object fair;
Still will her faithful voice each ill disclose,
Teaching thee what to shun and what to dare:
She will not lull thee to unsafe repose
On top of sea-beat rock, or Etna dire,
Nor urge thee naked on, thro' Lapland's snows,
Nor bid thee like Asbestos tempt the fire:
Now, will she bid thee yield, now resolute aspire.

"Fear not that Grace and Joy will fly the maid;
Where Grace and Joy in union just are found,
Her gracious smiles their sacred charm will aid,
And spread full certainty o'er all around.
(Ah!  how unlike wild Fancy's masquerade!)
Should lovely forms in her calm track appear,
Shun not the bliss they give, nor think 'twill fade;
Yield to the influence blest; and led by her,
Resign thy happy heart unchecked by doubt or fear.

"Haply the path she leads, may seem less gay,
The groves less green, than Fancy's gaudy road,
And thy companions on the checquer'd way,
Less like the guests of some divine abode;
But changeless truth will every scene array,
And as the vista opens on thine eye,
Nobler will grow the scene, and full-orb'd day
Will help thy weaker vision to descry
Thy earthly journey's goal, e'en in the eternal sky!

"Chuse then, my son!  or fatal, gay deceit;
Or graver Truth, with safe but serious speech.
His young eye lingers on that beauteous cheat;
O vainly then doth sad Experience preach!
But now his eye is turn'd that glance to meet,
Which now can see without conviction blest&mdash;
See!  now he rushes to her virgin feet,
On her alone, his virtuous wishes rest,
He hails her as his guide, she clasps hint to her breast!"

Slow coursed the tears adown the sage's face,
As from his heart fled keen Suspense's pang,
Majestic Reason smiled with soften'd grace,
And listening angels gratulation sang:
But still one task remain'd; youth's choice to place
On fit companion, by whose linked side
Unwearied still:  his lab'ring foot might trace
Each devious track where led their placid guide;
Whose love should be his joy, whose virtues rare, his pride.

For this, two lovely candidates were nigh;
So lovely both, that neither seemed most fair,
Or if indeed you might advantage spy,
'Twas where Youth wished that all perfection were.
Experience mark'd with many a boding sigh,
That ardent gaze which spoke the kindling heart;
On Friendship's form he fix'd his judging eye,
But fervid Youth, struck by a viewless dart,
Look'd upon Love alone, nor saw pale Reason start

So warm his gaze, that bashful Love away
Turn'd her fair head, and gently mov'd aside;
While as she mov'd, a stripling slight and gay,
Swiftly before her steps was seen to glide:
At his approach, the blood with stronger tide
Rush'd thro' the veins of youth, and fir'd his cheek;
Forgot at once his teacher and his guide,
He long'd that urchin's winning power to seek,
And thro' his witching lips to Love enamour'd speak.

Who knows not Hope?  around whom childish brow
The rainbow-tinted halo lightly plays,
And bright reflected from that forehead's snow,
In changeful colour sheds its cheerful blaze?
On his fresh cheek the rose eternal stays,
Beneath his foot the grass and flow'rets rise;
Still as he waves his wand, with blest amaze
The rapt eye sees new earth, new seas, new skies,
While on the listening ear swell all heaven's harmonies!

On went the boy, creating as he flew,
Bright forms that burst like bubbles into air,
But as they vanish'd all, he others drew,
And smil'd and deem'd them permanent as fair:
Yet vain and fleeting still, these objects were,
And the tied sight at length would took no more;
Youth gazed awhile, then sought that vision rare,
Whom Hope as sweet precursor dew before:
She comes!  the goddess comes!  all ruder themes be o'er!

Ah!  dangerous Love!  what mortal hand may dare,
That form divine, in earthly verse to shew?
Impregnate with her sighs, the perfum'd air
Breathes of their sweetness, and with sudden glow,
Like southern summers burn; red roses blow
'Mid brier and willow, 'mongst her golden hair:
Her bashful looks oft seek the earth below,
While thro' her virgin cheek and bosom fair,
The flash of frequent blush, speaks softest wishes there.

Clad in transparent robe of spotless white,
That close from head to foot around her winds,
Fain would she veil her beauties from the sight,
But virtuous Love no sheltering mantle finds;
E'en her own erring hand the robe unbinds,
And thro' the texture thin, howe'er compress'd,
Her blushing form the hardy gazer blinds.
Confus'd and frighted oft, she stops distress'd,
Then screens with modest hand, her white and panting breast.

Her eyes are tearful, yet like April's sun
That now in clouds, and now in brightness moves,
They make all lovely that they look upon;
Soft is their tender light, as gentle doves,
Or like the pensive star by which she roves;
But still they rest not, and their swift glance flies
From past to future; now the past it loves,
And now the distant prospects that arise
Clad in eternal beams 'mid Expectation's skies!

Sometimes all sad and slow and faint she walks;
Sometimes with flying foot outstrips the gale;
Now to a thousand echoes wildly talks;
Now listens mute to her own nightingale:
Now is her cheek with fear or sorrow pale;
Then flushed with joy, or dark with jealous throe;
Now gay she sings, and now with thrilling wail
Tears off her rosy wreath, and with the bough
Of cypress, dropping tears, like maniac wraps her brow.

Behind came Constancy in modest guise,
With garment strong, that closely girt her round;
Unchanging blue it was, like her bright eyes,
Which fix'd intently on remotest ground,
Nor tuned at rudest shock, nor soothest sound:
Onward she went, unheeding of the way,
Tho' o'er her head by purple amaranth crown'd,
Or fierce suns darted their unnerving ray,
Or piercing sleet hail'd down, or lightnings 'gan to play.

All haste, all transport, as the pageant passed,
Youth sprang with eager grasp fair love to seize,
But sudden stopp'd, as on the rising blast,
Came sound of voice like clear September's breeze,
That freshly-sweeping o'er the dew-bright trees,
New-strings each slacken'd nerve, and glads the sense.
Still as it nearer drew, by sweet degrees
Astonished youth felt its blest influence,
And wonder'd what the sound, and where, and whence?

Mounting with springing step the broad ascent,
A buoyant form of matchless shape he spied,
Attired like one whose ardent soul is bent
To win in fleetest race by Glory's side.
Flinging its changeless splendor far and wide,
From his bright forehead flamed the polar star,
Thro' his clear cheek the ruby-tinctur'd tide
Shone with a healthful glow; while on the air.
Back from his radient eyes was blown the clust'ring hair.

Simple his robe, not fashion'd to conceal,
But worn for decent and convenient shade:
Still as its folds were stirr'd, the winds reveal
The ample chest 'neath which his heart was laid,
There dwelt that heart all fearlessly displayed,
(So clear and fine the covering flesh was spread.)
Its pulse beat strong and equal, unbetrayed
By aught of mortal mould, to coward dread;
And so with warmth it glow'd, that heat and light it shed.

Skilled was the heroic youth, in storied lore,
And well he knew to charm both soul and ear:
Oft would he tell of lofty days of yore,
Till every listener's bosom thrill'd to hear,
And trembled in each eye the enthusiast's tear;
Then brave souls kindled at his gen'rous fire;
Or longed to guide the prow, or wield the spear,
Or strike with prophet hand the epic lyre,
Thus did his rhetoric high, the varied wish inspire!

If death to dare for virtuous Freedom's sake,
He sought to animate some youthful breast,
Not trumpet-sound like his clear voice could wake
The patriot ardour from inglorious rest:
And if to comfort one by grief oppressed,
That touching voice were tuned to sooth and calm,
Not Heaven's own dew o'er Araby the blest,
Steals softer down, or sheds a sweeter balm,
Or e'er o'er tranced sense in gentler motion swam.

What tho' no measur'd lay he knew to frame,
Nor touch'd with artful hand the lyric strings,
Whene'er he sought to kindle love of Fame,
Like morning's lark, loud-warbling where she springs,
That as she higher was, still sweeter sings,
Still loftier tower'd his eloquence on high,
As nobler theme essay'd its eagle wings;
Still deeper glow'd his cheek, more bright his eye,
And richer flow'd his voice like seraph minstrelsy.

With such companion, who would fear to go
Thro' every, change of life's uncertain scene?
His glowing heart would kindly warmth bestow,
When wintry blasts were howling bleak and keen:
When dark the path, wills its all-piercing sheen
His forehead's star would deepest glooms dispel;
When toilsome grown, his faithful arms between,
The weary soul might blest and safely dwell,
Listing his converse rich, like poets' varied shell.

Light-vaulting now he gained the rising hill,
And fix'd on doubtful Youth his gracious eye;
Close by his foot then flow'd a crystal rill,
That fair reflected all his symmetry;
E'en as he spoke an echo answer'd nigh;
And at his breathings pun, thick myrtles round
With livelier verdure shot their branches high;
He smil'd, and Youth's warm heart, with stronger bound,
Beat rapturous in his breast, and own'd it holy ground.

Friendship, the noble prompter of all good,
The rare reward of virtuous life below,
Now for acceptance meet, before him stood,
And Love was there, to boast her rival glow.
But could Love's power such high renown bestow,
Could Love's weak voice, thus prompt to godlike deed?
Could Love's frail arm avert each hostile blow,
Or in the brave defence devoted bleed?
And ah!  did even Love, bright Friendship's charms exceed?

Thus mus'd fond Youth, while Love at distance kept,
But as the Beauty swiftly closer drew,
A cloud of fragrance o'er his senses swept,
So sense o'erpowering, that Reason flew,
And swooning, vanished for awhile from view;
But soon revived, she caught his hand aside,
And while her sheltering arm she round him threw,
Thus earnest said, "O hear thy chosen guide!
Ere to companion wrong, thy erring soul be tied.

"I own Love fair, delightful too as fair;
And might we trust, no maze so dear or meet;
But oft him shrinks from the world's searching air,
And backward oft returns with truant feet.
If still she mov'd with her associates sweet,
Then were Life's pilgrimage a progress gay:
But Hope too frequent seeks some new retreat,
And Love leaves Constancy upon the way;
Then Lightness or Despair her altered bosom sway.

"But Friendship with immortal vigour glows,
Nor sun can scorch, we blast despoil his bloom;
By him he loves, with the same step he goes,
To Honour's throne, or dark Oblivion's tomb,
(Willing to share his joy, or cheer his gloom.)
Nor road can tire, nor thick'ning fogs confuse;
And if to trial sharp the gods should doom
Him best-belov'd, 'twist life and truth to choose,
Friendship would nobly teach, that cherish'd life to lose."

"Friendship be then my choice!" was Youth's reply,
While quick averted from Love's madd'ning sight,
Disorder'd, struggling, sad, his trembling eye,
Shut out her dangerous image with the light:
Yet tears triumphant wash'd his aspect bright,
As Friendship lock'd him in a rapt embrace;
Mild Reason's voice put fond regret to flight;
Experience blessed his son; and Friendship's face,
Effulgent with delight, spread sunshine o'er the place.
