Despot!  whose scorpions rend the mind,
Thy smile affrights, thy frown appals;
By frenzy forged, thy fetters bind
Where deep the barb of anguish falls!
Scathed is each nerve, and sear'd the heart
To Pity's beam, to Mercy's dart;
The toneless ear no strains delight
That music chants to angels bright;
No gelid tears, no vital showers
E'er cool thine arid bed;
But bleak the bearded tempest lours,
And rude the wild waves lash thy head;
There, perch'd upon the riven rock,
While loud and shrill the frighted curlews scream,
Well-pleased thou feel'st the sullen billows shock,
That, ever and anon, bursts on thy startled dream.

Nurs'd in a cavern's rayless gloom,
Far from the bracing breeze of morn;
Brown Health ne'er ting'd thy sickly bloom,
Thy giant brows were shagg'd with thorn;
Born in a thicket's howling shade
Of Melancholy, moping maid!
When Anger, borne in murkiest mood,
Surpris'd her in the tangled wood;
Grasp'd in whose bold, enfuriate arms,
The nymph a mother's name confest;
Yet saw in thee no early charms,
Thy lips no fondling kiss carest;
But scowling o'er the desert scene,
Roam'd with the wolf the muttering fiend, Despair;
Gaunt was his bony frame, austere his mien,
Now mute in grief, now blasphemous with care.

At stern Ambition's call he flies,
Shame and Revenge his chariot steer;
Fierce as his raven-coursers rise,
Disease and Death the engines bear.
A tyger's skin that closely clung
Round his lean neck, in tatters hung;
Crusted with gore, a poniard blade
Half-viewless forms of death betray'd;
But eke his eye with joy malign,
Laugh'd as it mark'd the poison'd bowl;
Self-murder's stab he call'd divine,
And urged to free the lingering soul:
He bade no frantic mourner wait,
Lest dawning hope might o'er the heart rejoice,
But told, uncall'd, to brave eternal fate,
And spurn the mandate of the Eternal's voice.

That victim! &mdash; lo!  he starts away;
Sunk are his eyes, his bosom bare;
Reckless he braves the biting day,
Or courts the burning air;
Now by some wint'ry torrent thrown,
He mingles his with Winter's moan;
Or sullen, now the wanderer leans
Uncharm'd by Summer's laughing scenes:
But hark!  he hears the merry sound,
He spies the goat-maid's happy glance,
As trim her nut-brown locks are bound
To wanton in the village dance;
Far, far he flies!  no visions fair,
Nor Orphean lute the woe-worn heart beguile;
He feels the blood-shot glances of Despair,
And furies chase him with convulsive smile.

Euterpe's godlike offspring flies
The mortal cup of blood to drain;
He dies!  the bold Athenian dies!
Who vanquish'd on the Cenchrian main.
Anew the shrieking fiends declare
Th' immortal triumph of Despair;
When quiet to a world could spring
From fate within the Punic ring.
A thirsty poniard strikes yon blow,
The mighty eastern monarch bleeds!
He falls!  he falls!  and proudly low,
A murder'd mother's corse succeeds.
While lo!  the Colchian sorceress, wild
Her fiery flashes, and her snaky hair;
To curst revenge devotes each smiling child,
And steels her soul to pleading Nature's pray'r.

When proud Achea mourns the day
The palm on Roman brows to bind;
Why sinks beneath thy gorgon sway
The brave Tegean's dauntless mind?
In the mad whirlwind of the soul
Thou crown'st with flowers the potion'd bowl;
Then, ruthless power!  with fraudful mien
Thy venom'd whispers intervene;
"O!  mourner, come to peaceful sleep,
The long, long rest from pain and woe;
Poor mourner, why thus live to weep,
When peace eternal smiles below?"
False is the song, assumed the jeering smile,
The good, the just to hurry to the tomb;
But cherub hosts their pilgrimage beguile,
And pour immortal splendours through the gloom.

O!  haste, divine Religion!  haste,
And bid the sullen tyrant fly;
Let the forlorn enthusiast taste
The fount of hope that springs on high:
Nor here, terrific power!  repair,
When bleak December shrouds the air;
Nor force the victor hand to shed
The blood that Glory's laurels fed;
Nor here thy horrent locks diffuse,&mdash;
O!  edgeless be thy reeking blade,
Unquaff'd the cup of deadly dews,
And foil'd the fiends that lend thee aid;
Still may the soul though stung by woe,
To Resignation's holy calm be given;
The hope imbibe, the consolation know,
That sufferings here can smooth the path to heav'n.
