Thou art above me, in thy twilight lustre,
Spirits of midnight float before thy march,
And countless stars around thee, Dian!  muster,
By the blue heavens envelop'd; and their arch
Curtain'd about thy rays, invites thy search
Thro' the dark caverns of the deep; &mdash; thy breath
Hangs o'er the spreading oak, the towering larch
In diamond sheen, and glitters all beneath;
And silence leans upon thee, like the touch of death!

Thou art above me, like a splendid vision,
Couch'd on the breast of youth; &mdash; like the rapt eye
Of lovers, midst a world of their creation,
Wakening soft thoughts that reach eternity.
Thy whispering zephyrs, like their stolen sigh;
Thy face so pale, like wishes form'd and blasted;
Thy soft step, like the lost soul's agony,
Thy shadow points the spot, where hope once rested,
Thou look'st, as if Despair's wan bleach'd cheek address'd it.

Thou shower'st on Soultra's side thy bright effulgence,
An angel's gaze the stole of night bewraying;
The tears of morning follow still thy cold glance,
Like frozen age, a lover's hopes betraying;
The world of waters in thy robes arraying;
The mountains silvering with a stole of white;
Thou, like a phantom of creation, straying
Amidst the desolate chambers of the night,
Pour'st thro' deep silence, &mdash; grandeur, &mdash; from thine urn of light.

Adieu!  adieu! &mdash; The day-star now is spread
In summer's flush around me: &mdash; earth and air,
The glorious circle of the heavens are led
Radiant, from nature's bounteous lap, &mdash; how fair!
Bribing the morn to ope her bosom bare;
Its amorous eye encircles all her charms,
The uplands smile, &mdash; and now the valleys share
Its bounties, and the mountain vista swarms
With life; &mdash; above, below, the opening prospect warms.

Northward from Soultra's summit pass thine eye,
See what an Eden starts upon the sight!
Wood, mountain, ocean, stream, all blended lie,
In sweet confusion, mingling in their light,
Whate'er the soul can wish, or sense invite;
All, that creation warm from nature's hand
Breath'd on its pallet, when from shades of night
Rose this round globe at the divine command,
And the first airs of spring spread life around the land.

From east to west, th' indented shores survey;
The eye with rapture trembles; and the soul
Bent upon contemplation, wings its way,
And times long past within its orbit roll:
When, on this goodly prospect rapine stole,
And death, not manna, on the morning beam
Repos'd; and with it, pour'd a hideous shoal
Of traitors, who like thieves at midnight came;
Spill'd the life blood, and drench'd the soil with the pure stream.

Sweeps high the sun along the mountain-tops,
Look how the golden disk illumes their cloud!
Is their broad base, o'er which its radiance slopes,
The vanguard of that glory, or its shroud?
Spread'st thou thy golden mantle o'er yon flood?
Fann'st thou its billow with thy zephyr's sigh?
Pour'st thou thy smile upon its wave of blood?
And, beck'ning ages that have long gone by,
Point'st than that track of fire, that once illum'd their sky?

Starts Borthwick's pile upon me, whose rude tower
Seems like the mast of some wreck'd argosy,
And there Craigmillar's humbler shadows shower
Their ghastly forms, o'er Mary's memory;
And Roslin's castle, meeting fill the eye
Of contemplation; and those bowers that lean
On the white foam, whose sparkles playful fly
Up the proud steep of castled Hawthornden;
And mass more dungeon'd deep, &mdash; its Crichton's bloody den.

Umbrag'd by bowers, where shade on shade reposing,
Yield twilight's livery grey 'midst dazzling noon;
Freshness amidst o'erpowering suns disclosing,
And summer's fruits caress'd by vernal bloom,
Thy groves, Dalkeith, I thread, &mdash; and court the gloom
Of many a sweet recess; &mdash;  before me stand
Thy Graeme, thy Douglas! &mdash; names, that yet assume
Power to command, as then, when o'er the land
Rush'd Edward's fearful breath, and England's iron hand.

Lov'st thou the gentle slope, the level field?&mdash;
The waving rise, the smooth clad lawn is here!
Lov'st thou those heights that may the east winds shield?&mdash;
Rise the rude rocks, and sullen crags appear!
Lov'st thou the sea-beat shore, its boundless sphere?
Lost in the distance roll the waves along!
Sigh'st thou for Nature's voice to charm the ear?&mdash;
The winds of heaven pour round thee, &mdash; and the song
Of cheerful feeling sweeps the woods, and vales among!

Seek'st thou the days of yore, thro' mists of time?
Start on the eye, no relic, &mdash; no, nor shade,
Nor hoary fragment! &mdash; But the scene sublime
Lives, as it lived, &mdash; nor needs it fancy's aid.
The eating touch of time can ne'er pervade
The rock which pillows yon rude castle's brow!
Yon crag's bold terrace, &mdash; age will ne'er invade
And silently upon the plain below,
Features of former days, spell-bound, emit their glow!

For lo!  Edina's terrac'd heights appear,
Sparkle her grey cliffs in meridian light;
Smiles her blue ocean, rock and mountain wear
Banners of triumph, waving with delight;
For Nelson's bold heart at Trafalgar's fight,
Rush'd o'er his world of waters; and his eye
Like the plum'd eagle's from his aerie's height,
Flamed its swift track; commanding victory
To fix his deathless fame a planet in the sky.

And bells are chiming, and the air's embalm'd
Glist'ning with smiles, and eyes of love are beaming;
Scarce stirs a breeze, the pennants are becalm'd,
As if the world on happiness was dreaming:
And lightning from the cannon's mouth is gleaming,
And rocks reverberate its thunders round;
Look!  how the clouds of smoke aloft are streaming,
As if the new sprung morning from the ground
Breath'd; &mdash; and each British heart returns a swift rebound.

Now down the lovely Forth the breeze is curling,
And gently heaves the billow's rising swell,
Hark the hurra!  the sails are now unfurling,
Quick spreads the canvass with a wizard's spell!
Feels not thy heart the seaman's bold farewell?
Aloft, &mdash; from shore to shore, the signal's pouring!
Shall not &mdash; Hereafter &mdash; of their daring tell?
Look how Britannia's o'er the billows towering,
While purple clouds of eve are on the white wave showering!

How stately steps she on her glassy ocean!
Like a proud sea-god bursting from the deep;
Streamers that kiss the heavens, &mdash; wind, &mdash; wave in motion,
Worlds at her beck, and fame upon her sweep.
Shuddering, &mdash; her red Trafalgar's billows steep
Her prow in blood; &mdash; her Nelson's signal flew;
Britannia's thunders on the wild floods leap,
Death in their touch; &mdash; swift lightnings round her drew;
And glory's dreadful echoes from her deck she threw.

Night comes! &mdash; not here! &mdash; The moon its crescent shews,
And countless stars have cloth'd th' unclouded sky;
One mass of light around Edina glows,
And voice of joy proclaims our victory.
And oh how sweet!  to lift the wond'ring eye,
To range the arching dome, the earth, the air;
Pillar'd on fire seems heaven's broad canopy,
Whilst in its concave deep embosom'd there,
Edina!  stream your turrets, like a comet's glare!

And there are throbbing breasts abroad, and eyes
Fearful and feverish with restrained feeling;
Mingling like whirling eddies, &mdash;  charities,
Whose burning impulse on the rent heart stealing,
With shuddering quickness sets the full soul reeling;
Glory its beacon lights! &mdash; Britannia's star
In floods of rapture to the pulse appealing;
Whilst her rays trembling o'er the wrecks of war,
Points father, brother, son, mangled with bloody scar.

Say, didst thou e'er, at the soft hour when leans
The calm of evening o'er that rock of grey,
And the mind's eye a mystic image weens
In the chang'd forms, that flit on parting day,
Call forth those phantoms, by some magic lay,
Whose genius yet entwin'd about this spot,
Wreaths round and round their bloody tragedy,
Feelings, which ages have not yet forgot,
Which ages yet to come shall mark as Nature's blot?

In that calm hour I've set me, when the gleam
Of sun-set strikes upon the hermit's cell;
And visions pass'd me like a midnight dream;
Thoughts of the days of old upon me fell.
I've set me; &mdash; round me rung day's parting knell;
The stars rose one by one, yon Gothic skreen,
(Beneath whose broken crumbling arcades, dwell
Relics, &mdash; whose bleeding shades yet here convene;)
Was in the moon-light swath'd, and shiver'd in its sheen.

Up Rizzio rose, scarf'd in his bloody shroud;
Methought his dying screams before me grew;
With dagger dripping gore beside him stood
Henry, &mdash; and Murder round that shadow drew.
Came Bothwell next; &mdash; cadaverous his hue;
Famish'd and shrunk, undaunted yet his air;
And then a lovely vision rose to view,
So pale, so wan with suffering, yet so fair,
That Mercy's voice was loud, &mdash; where Justice fear'd to spare.

Tho' injuries had smitten her to the core,
And tho' disease had fester'd in each vein;
Tho' friends had left her, and reproach had wore
All zest from life, &mdash; and life but endless pain;
Yet from her eye beam'd majesty's high strain
And relics of the times of old were seen;
When with the graces in her royal train,
She rose like Venus from her sea-girt skreen,
To rule a barbarous age, &mdash; to mourn as Scotia's queen.

In that calm hour I've set me, when the moon
Rush'd up her heavens like a bold crag on fire;
Dark'ning amidst the lustres of her noon,
Meteors coruscant with the lightning's ire.
Her beams reflected from each ancient spire,
Cloth'd the black dingy mass with robe of white
Like glory wreathing round the night's attire,
Throwing upon our vision, forms once bright,
Eclipsing charms, that once had fed the noontide's light.

And then the scene's lone stillness, and the time
The place so wild; so deep, so dark the glen;
The crags so rugged, and yon forms sublime
Raising their green heads o'er night's raven ken
Breath'd life on thought; &mdash; and swift before me ran
Dalzell's dread squadrons, Cromwell's bloody fray,
Fraser and Cumin's wrath from his deep den
Ramsay like tiger hounding on his prey,
Scotland's bright star in Bruce; &mdash; England's in Salisbury.

Darkness has fled; &mdash; The star of morning comes,
And the fresh sea breeze hails the matin hour;
From the proud castle's height the pealing drums
O'er rock, and keep, and crag, and buttress pour.
On Gothic pile the morning sun-beams shower;
Flows all around a stream of lucid ray;
And fields, and lawns, immix'd with loveliest flower,
With note of bird, from many a sheltering spray,
Thro' dewy waves of light, salute the rising day.

At such an hour, and under such a sky,
Pure, balsam'd, fresh, as e'er was blushing May;
At such a hour, with rapture in mine eye,
And heart so careless, light as popinjay,
With satchel on my back, I've brush'd the grey
And pensile rock; and from its moss-clad height,
Mark'd the bright flush of ether wing its way,
And lure to form, thro' living floods of light.
Rock, ocean, mountain, stream; &mdash; and life and love unite.

And eye, and soul, and feeling drunk the charm;
From, infant years it spell-bound led the heart;
The mind's first openings caught the fond alarm,
Temper'd my being, &mdash; thro' my pulses dart.
I grasp'd the soul of Nature, ne'er to part;
Where'er my fortune led me, thro' what clime,
Edina! &mdash; thou thy triumphs still assert;
I hung upon thy charms, thy site sublime;
That love which youth imbib'd was sanctified by time.

And when the dog-star rag'd beneath the line,
Hush'd every wind of heaven, and seas whose flood
Boil'd; and a green scum floated on the brim;
And thro' the parch'd vein rush'd the heated blood;
And on the branch the brown leaf wrinkled stood;
The feather'd tribe hung motionless the wing;
And o'er the silent vault no wand'ring cloud
Swam; &mdash; nor was shadow seen; &mdash; and in the sprint
The panting savage stood, &mdash; and made the woodlands ring.

And time fled, &mdash; drop by drop; &mdash; the minutes hung
Upon the hour-glass; and the heavy eye
Scarce could the red sun chase; as fierce was flung
The living embers up a burning sky.
Then homewards would my vision'd fancies fly,
And on the lulling sea-breeze would I dream;
On fields, whose lovely web of green might vie
With all that poets of their Eden deem;
On trembling shades of light, on cool and crystal stream!

On sea-girt cliff; on undulating plain;
On mountain torrent swell'd with mountain's snow;
On mountain nymph, whose blush the morning's stain
Borrow'd, to flush its ether with her glow.
On tongues, whose words with soften'd accents flow.
On eyes, soft radiance beaming; and on breast
White as the wave that clothes the Forth's dark brow,
When surly Winter o'er its surge is press'd
Whistling along its banks, and foaming up its crest.

Nature how varied in thy forms! &mdash; how grand!
Still changing! &mdash; Yet, GOD marks in thee his might
From the flat Nile that scarce steals o'er it strand,
To the rude Rhone that shoots its Alpine height!
My parent land!  I mean not to invite
From all, that feeling which I owe to thee;
Yet stern's that soul, which looks not with delight
Along thy chequer'd coast, thy melting sea,
Thy grey and savage rock, &mdash; thy deathless ancestry.

Lov'd scenes!  on me thy winning charms bestow,
Inspire my muse with nature's boundless view;
Star of the north!  around me spread thy glow,
And with thy witching spirit me imbue:
Edina! &mdash; age thy steps it may pursue
With wrinkl'd front, with locks of raven grey;
Thou like the Phoenix, shalt thy course renew;
Now starts't thou from thine ashes, &mdash; and thy day
Of youth already blooms, and winter melts in May!
