When welcome rain the weary reapers drove
Beneath the shelter of a neighbouring grove,
Robin, a love-sick swain, lagg'd far behind,
Nor seem'd the weight of falling showers to mind;
A distant solitary shade he sought,
And thus disclos'd the troubles of his thought.

Yes, yes, these drops may cool my outward heat,
These breezes fresh assuage the boiling sweat,
But my hot blood, my heart that's all in flame,
Nor drops can cool, nor breezes fresh can tame.

Here, here it was in this unlucky place,
Where first I got a sight of Betty's face;
Blyth on this path the charmer tripp'd, and near
We strew'd the golden product of the year:
Heedless I glanc'd, nor could my eyes command,
Till the rough sickle gash'd into my hand;
Down pour'd the blood, the reapers all burst out,
In peals of laughter; Betty look'd about;
Red grew my fingers, redder far my face:
What could I do in such a desperate case?

Away I slunk, to Gammar made my moan,
My Gammar (God be with her now she's gone)
Skillful the gushing blood with cobwebs staid,
Then on the wound an healing plaister laid;
The healing plaister ceas'd the painful sore,
The fear indeed remains, but nothing more.

Not so that other wound, that inward smart,
My Gammar could not cure a bleeding heart;
I've borne the bitter torment this long year,
And all my life-time must be forc'd to bear,
Lest Betty will a kind physician prove,
For none but she has skill to medicine love.

But how should honest Betty give relief?
Betty's a perfect stranger to my grief:
Oft I've resolv'd my ailment to explain;
Oft I've resolv'd indeed &mdash; but all in vain:
A springing blush, spread fast o'er either cheek,
Down Robin look'd, and deuce a word could speak.

Can I forget that night?  (I never can)
When on the clean-swept hearth the spindles ran?
The lasses drew their line with busy speed,
The lads as busy minded every thread,
When sad!  the line so slender Betty drew,
Snap went the thread, and down the spindle flew:
To me it made, &mdash; they ey'd with watchful view,
I must, must take it up; what could I do?
I took it, and (what goes plaguy hard)
E'en reach'd it back without the sweet reward.

O lasting stain!  it's easy yet to trace
A guilty conscience in my blushing face;
I fain would wash it out, but never can;
Still fair it bides, like blood of murder'd man.

Not so was Willy bashful &mdash; Willy spy'd
A pair of scissars by the lass's side;
These slily loos'd, he drop'd the spindle down&mdash;
And what said Betty?  Betty strove to frown:
Up flew her hand to strike the crouching swain,
But ah!  it fell but lightly down again;
What follow'd next, it galls me to repeat,
E'en now I feel my heart with envy beat.

Oh!  well is he that ever he was born,
He's free from all this mockery and scorn,
What, must I still be teaz'd with straggling sheep,
With far-fetch'd sighs, and things I said asleep;
Still shamefully left trifling in the rear,
Jest of each swain, and ev'ry reaper's jeer?

Where's now that active strength, (ah hapless love!)
Which erst I shew'd when we for victory strove;
When thro' the standing corn a lane I made,
And bustling far behind the rest survey'd?

Alas!  that strength is gone, and comes no more,
Till Betty's kindness shall the loss restore;
And vain the hope that e'er she should be kind,
Till I have freely spoken out my mind,
Till I have learn'd to face the maiden fair,
Oil'd my slow tongue, and edg'd my sheepish air.

A book there is &mdash; but I forget the name&mdash;
Something of Compliments, I think, &mdash; the same,&mdash;
Which to a clever spark can change a clown;
Oh!  had I this, my business would be done;
And I'm resolv'd to buy, whate'er it cost;
My flute, &mdash; for what's my flute if Betty's lost?
And if I clasp the fair one in my arms,
A fig for whistles and for music's charms.

Farewel my flute then, quick the Carlisle fair,
There to the book-shop I will straight repair,
And boldly for the Compliments enquire;
Care I a farthing?  let the 'prentice sneer.

That done, a handsome letter I'll indite,
Handsome as ever country lad did write;
A letter that shall tell her all I feel,
And every wish without a blush reveal.

But now the breaking clouds disperse away,
And the clear sun emits a chearful ray,
Brave hearty blasts the drooping barley dry;
The rest are gone to reap, &mdash; and so must I.
