My Barrack-room! &mdash; I thought that hour gone by!
But little we can read the book of Fate!
E'en had I claim'd the gift of prophecy,
(GOD knows my talents are not that way great!)
On such a guess I ne'er could meditate.
Then, &mdash; since 'tis so;  &mdash;  my Barrack-room, to thee
This Canto let me humbly dedicate;
Thy view is cheerful, airy, full of glee,
And life runs smoothly on; &mdash; and that is odd for me.

My Barrack-room! &mdash; 'tis like the march of time,
Sober, and plain, and stript of ornament:
No trappings here, to figure the sublime,
But reason points its finger to Content.
The proud man here, would find his foppery shent;
The rich &mdash; that riches were of small avail;
And poverty, &mdash; that comfort was so blent,
That want of wealth would ne'er one thought assail,
All down the tide of life may glide with easy sail.

Yet are there some, (where may they not be found?)
Who wrest to wrong what Providence supplies;
Who mock the same unwearied peaceful round,
And look for that, which Heaven to most denies.
Who try with taper light the noon-tide skies
To gild, &mdash; unconscious of the gift of GOD;
And follow discontent, where'er it flies;
And curse the light of day, the dreadful load
Of life; and of themselves make heaven's avenging rod.

My Barrack room! &mdash; I love thy cotterie
Of fun, of glee, of black, of brown, of fair;
The old, the young, the thoughtful, and the gay,
The learned droll, the droll unlearn'd is there.
There nonsense will with sentiment repair;
And then comes starch'd philosophy so fine;
And then the hum-drum critic with his stare;
And then the reveller in a zig-zag line:
And Nature's unspoil'd son, &mdash; and Genius all divine.

It is great Nature's extract; 'tis a book
Bound up in small; but legible and terse;
It is this world's epitome, &mdash; a look
Borrow'd from all that's common or that's scarce.
'Tis "seria mixta jocis," &mdash; wit and farce;
Some shrinking from, some mocking life's cold gale;
Some whistling, and the ills of life disperse;
Some shuddering stand, and droop beneath their wail;
Some face the stubborn tempest, clad in iron mail.

'Tis in our little world, as in your great,
We boast our fashions, nonsense, and caprice;
We have the brave, the cheerful, the sedate;
The son of Mars, &mdash; and eke &mdash; the son of Peace.
And Folly's tongue here wags without surcease;
And Laughter weeping shakes her aching side;
And sometimes Wit &mdash; (tho' seldom) finds a place;
But Gravity his wrinked sconce must hide,
His freezing atmosphere we cannot here abide.

What sounds are these which burst upon the night?
'Tis Comus comes with his disorder'd crew.
The welkin ring, and silence in affright
Bids to our mess-room this one night, &mdash; adieu!
The Salii here their frantic feats pursue;
And old Silenus sometimes too will join
With gambols ever varied, ever new;
The storm without's out-storm'd by that within;
And all the world's forgot in laughter, love, and wine

'Tis past &mdash; the day's rude clamour!  evening comes,
And with it all its stillness and repose;
Hark!  to the cheerful fifes, the horns, the drums,
Sounding the night's advance, the day's sweet close;
Upon the swell the distant echo grows;
And like the morn of youth it melts away.
Look!  how the evening o'er yon margin glows,
Descending to the brink of ocean's play,
Plung'd now within its flood, and mantling all with grey!

Clear the serene of Heaven!  How blue the sky!
Dark and more dark the face of night comes on;
Now the thin vapours trembling o'er it fly,
And blend their gloom' athwart the horizon.
Sweeps from its ocean's cave the blast along,
And ride the fleecy clouds upon its breast;
Rattles the hail the sloping roofs among;
Hastens the shivering traveller to his rest;
And pining, trembling looks the wretch, with want opprest.

Now here, now there, the lamp's dull orbs combine
To make the gloom still deeper; weak and pale
The rays which from their wat'ry surface shine;
No laughing stars are they to charm the gale.
Shivering, I haste my cheerful fire to hail;
I feel its warmth subdue my gloom of mind:
Yet list, with aching heart, unto the wail
Of want, disease, and wretchedness combin'd:
The thousand heart aches, which around the poor man wind.

It is a fearful night! &mdash; The clock strikes nine!
Now set the watch! &mdash; The trumpet peals its round!
And soft recorders emulously join,
To blend their heart-felt harmony around.
How swims along the vault the melting sound!
'Midst midnight echoes deep and howling storm;
As if the angel of our doom was bound,
To breathe the signal of that dreadful morn;
Hallowing each note with bliss, to cheer the soul forlorn.

Now comes the frightful spirit of the year,
Moaning amidst its elemental war;
The curling billow his proud charioteer,
The lightning cloud his dark and fearful car!
Rejoicingly, the hurrying winds from far
Sweep after him; &mdash; and at each lingering pause,
Silence, enthron'd on evenings setting star,
Fills up the dreadful interval, and draws
The mind subdued, to think on Heaven's unerring laws.

Howl on ye winds!  your notes have charms for me;
I like your shuddering wailing lapse of woe;
You breathe perhaps the soul of destiny,
And point to trials man must undergo!
How awful, from your shroud of hail and snow,
You sweep the midnight's void! &mdash; the watchman's cry
Courses your thundering wheels; &mdash; the lightning's glow,
Like glory streaming o'er your canopy,
Flits o'er a slumbering world, and rends the woven sky.

The pale moon peeps abroad, its silver ray
Wanders on yon proud cupola's blue height;
The drifting clouds along its summit play,
And rush like spectres on the brow of night;
The winds their breath: &mdash; and round them they invite
(With scorpions clad) the demon of despair;
Hark to their hisses!  as their whips alight
O'er the pale wretch, that shivering bends in prayer;
And with the houseless night-hag breathes the tainted air.

I see her standing like a pillar'd beam;
Round which the whistling blast its eddy throws;
Her shred of mantle withering in its stream,
Her bosom bar'd to every wind that blows:
O'er her pale cheek the tear of misery flows,
Frozen by the winds of heaven: &mdash; her madden'd eye
Shoots the red stream which round yon meteor grows;
And as the billow of the storm waves by,
Hark how the wild wretch shrieks her round of agony!

A wandering ray is thrown upon the tombs,
The crowded church-yard yawns, &mdash; the goblins shriek
Along the Liffey's vex'd margin; &mdash; booms
Its wave, as thro' each arch the currents break.
Hear'st thou the echo of each dash? &mdash; The wreck
Of the swollen tempest, rushing thro' its flood,
Boils o'er its stream, &mdash; and marks a livid track;
And yon red shooting star pours rays of blood,
Upon a slumbering world! &mdash; its pall yon coal-black cloud.

I peer into the bosom of the night,
I see gigantic structures round me rise,
A world of silence!  and my strain'd sight
Looks out for being; &mdash; being from me flies!
It seems the world's cold cemetery; mine eyes
Feed on the trophies of a former age;
The city of the desert round me lies,
A Nineveh!  o'er which the prophet's page
Speaks; &mdash; and time's ruins plead the language of the sage.

Rising above, the clouds a column springs,
The record of a noble soldier's arm;
Whose thunders broke the Gallic eagle's wings;
And hurl'd it breathless to its rock of storm.
Hibernia, hail! &mdash; To thee we owe that charm,
Which smash'd that dreadful talisman to dust:
Thou tower'st above the tempest's wild alarm;
Smil'st as its lightnings blaze; thy lightnings crush'd
A tempest, wild as hell, which over Europe rush'd.

Where art thou Dian? &mdash; let me call on thee!
Lucina, Cynthia, Cybele &mdash; appear!
Nor on the mountain, valley, nor the sea
Wilt thou expand thy beam, or turn to hear.
Oh lovely queen of night! &mdash; thy votary here
Looks on the ripple for thy charmed ray;&mdash;
Darkness but cowers upon the track of Fear,
And breathes its horrors o'er the thundering bay,
And deep eternal night excludes the hope of day!

Chaos is come again!   ye watch'd the stream
Of earthly glory down a summer's night;
When, Dian!  o'er the blue expanse thy beam
Shot, thro' yon heaving bay, its witching light.
Then, shook the waves their silver chains so bright,
And with thy smile their trembling rays were fir'd;
Heaven's planets fled, when, coming in thy might,
Saturn's bright day was quench'd, and Jove retir'd,
And all the host of heaven to worship thee aspir'd.

On such a night, (June just had breath'd on May,)
Earth, air, and sky, and ocean all perfum'd,
Light pressing on its waters, &mdash; Dublin bay
Op'd to my view, and like an Eden bloom'd,
With countless stars the heavens were then illum'd;
Smooth was the glassy mirror of the deep;
And the blue sky a darker blue assum'd;
And the wave trembled thro' the moon's soft sweep,
And silence spread its hush, and morning seem'd to weep.

And on the distance hung the mountain-range,
Frowning, half vision'd, on their robe of grey;
O'er wood and river, hamlet, village, grange,
And fairy meadow, spread the moon beams play;
And, curtain'd in the mist of morning, lay
The city's sleeping thousands; and a flame
Spir'd from its bosom, up the milky-way:
As over Naples sweeps Vesuvius, came
The deluge; thro' the night cloud rush'd its fearful aim.

Headland, and promontory bold, and rock,
And mountain, and the curving shore, and flood
Burst on my vision, and my senses mock,
And Naples and its gulf before me stood.
And morning rose, and on the scene I brood!
The sky deep blue, unclouded &mdash; and the sea
So smooth, so clear; &mdash; villa, and stream, and wood
Deep interwoven! &mdash; Do I rightly see?
Do I indeed embrace the shores of Italy?

Methought, the voice of twilight came abroad,
Trembling and hollow, fluttering, solemn, low;
A spirit stept before me, like a God,
Pale was his cheek, and furrow'd was his brow!
Sunk not his eye; it flash'd the lightning's glow;
Proud was his step, majestic was his mien;
And looks of triumph from his dark eyes flow,
And fell their fierce glance on a bloody plain,
Where lay the bleaching bones of all his warrior train.

Time had not worn his spirit nor his fire,
The eye each speaking light caught there again;
Age smiling wreath'd him in her white attire,
And glory panted in each swelling vein.
Heaps upon heaps appear'd the savage Dane,
Beneath their crowd the reddening waters groan'd;
And o'er thy rocks, Clontarf!  and round thy plain,
Came quick the gasp of death; the winds bemoan'd
The fearful bloody onset; &mdash; Death was there enthron'd.

Does thine eye glisten, king of th' em'rald isle,
Bending o'er trophies of the days of old?
Sons of these sires, awake! &mdash; around him smile,
Pointing to deeds as great, as brave, as bold.
Are not thy sinews from the same self mold?
Wakes glory's voice around thee &mdash; feeble, low?
I hear her strain! &mdash; it comes not weak and cold;
It is the whirlwind on the mountain brow,
Lashing the ocean's surge, and reddening evening's glow.

Times that are past! &mdash; thy voice is mingling here;
I hark thy whispers, and I feel thy flame;
Thy shadows o'er yon mountain-range appear,
And on their rocky crest expanded &mdash; Fame
To south, and north, and east, and west, thy name
Spreads with her trump's loud blast: &mdash; the op'ning sky
Blushing, &mdash; from cloud to cloud the proud acclaim
Extends; &mdash; and on yon blue arch flaming high,
Erin!  thy deathless deeds, thy glorious records lie.

Trembles the light of morn! &mdash; I see its star
Reflected in the dew-drop &mdash; Swell the fife,
And drum and trumpet, with the pomp of war,
Their sweet reveille! &mdash; day's restored to life!
Now stir the canaille, clamorous in strife;
Lags slow the watchman from his nightly round;
Rattle the streets with hurly-burly rife;
Raw feels the air, and comfortless the sound
Of winter's pelting storm, upon the plashy ground.

Blood-red the sun behind his cloud appears;
Sluggish the smoky vapor's trail'd along;
Dimly its tapering height the steeple rears;
And starv'd and trembling stand the lazy throng,
And in the distance, &mdash; hark! &mdash; the voice of song;
Not such as Tasso's o'er the Brenta flung;
But discord's heathenish brawl its crowds among
With Misery's downcast look round pity hung;
The heart's devouring sorrow, which contempt hath stung.

Now comes the noon, &mdash; the night! &mdash; the circle's run;
The same dull tale invites the same dull round;
The web of life is here but coarsely spun,
But what of that? &mdash; contentment may be found.
The mind is all!  and &mdash; what the mind can bound?
The peasant's blood is it less pure than thine?
The pensive eye tho' fix'd upon the ground,
Think'st thou its visual nerve dare not incline
To heaven? &mdash; the earth it looks on, can it not refine?

Fool!  through the glare of the bright mid-day sun,
How many dazzling objects cheat the eye!
Rapid to catch the phantoms, on we run,
To earth's remotest bounds we breathless fly!
The prize is ours! &mdash; But what our destiny?
Anguish &mdash; deception &mdash; or &mdash; a broken heart!
Mine, &mdash; be the shade! &mdash; There let me lowly lie,
Whilst, fancy breathing round me, shall impart
Bliss, &mdash; which in vain we search for in the crowded mart!
