Far from mad Folly's tinsel glare,
When dewy Twilight veils the sky;
With Meditation will I share
The joys of calm Tranquillity.

Whilst others weave the airy dance,
And crown the mantling bowl with flowers,
Let me with solemn steps advance,
To Contemplation's silent bowers.

The distant curfew's dying knell,
Borne on the Zephyr, meets mine ear;
And, tumbling o'er yon rocky dell,
The limpid rivulet murmurs near.

Sad Philomela pours her note,
And binds the soul in rapture's chain;
Whilst Sylphids light in ether float,
And listen to the melting strain.

With sullen pride, its shatter'd towers,
O'er yonder hill, the Castle rears;
Ruin hath mark'd his fatal powers,
And Horror o'er the wreck appears.

Near those rude walls, in days of yore,
Bold Victory shook her wings elate;
Her flaming shield on high she bore,
And triumph'd in majestic state.

To gain fair Freedom's heavenly sway,
Full many a gallant Baron bled;
And soldiers, rang'd in bright array,
Their blood-stain'd banners waving spread.

Here, at the gorgeous tournament,
When warriors cherish'd martial fire,
Oft would the Bard, to pleasure bent
Wake the soft magic of the lyre.

Struck by whose notes, at evening hour,
The shepherd as he hied him home,
Charm'd with the Minstrel's thrilling pow'r,
Would hasten to the high-arch'd dome.

Oft would the fretted roofs resound,
With praise of glorious chivalry,
'Till every hero taught the sound,
And bade their numbers float on high.

Here too MATILDA sought repose,
And banish'd each intrusive fear,
Whilst the fair partner of her woes
Indulg'd the sympathetic tear.

When LEICESTER, by his Queen's command,
Awhile forsook this woodland seat;
They, by the gentlest Zephyrs fann'd,
Disported in the calm retreat.

E'en now I see with mental ken,
Those sisters fair of heavenly mien;
They wander thro' the silent glen,
Whilst Pleasure haunts the pensive scene.

But hark &mdash; the cannons thund'ring roll;
And the dread Queen's approach declare;
What pangs, MATILDA, rend thy soul,
What piteous wailings swell the air.

ELIZA comes &mdash; with racking pain,
Revenge "had gnaw'd her secret heart;"
Dark Jealousy had fir'd her vein,
And pierc'd her with envenom'd dart.

ELIZA comes &mdash; A virgin choir
Strew wreaths of amaranthine flowers,
Whilst the full organ's swelling fire,
Breathes sweetly thro' the Gothic towers.

Amidst that choir, sublimely bright,
Tho' pierc'd with grief, MATILDA shines;
E'en to the Empress of the night
Reigns glorious 'mongst the lesser signs.

But see the LADY OF THE LAKE
Yon gorgeous pageantry prepare;
The little Loves their pennons shake,
Light floating in the liquid air.

They waft her o'er the lucid wave,
Thron'd on a rainbow color'd shell;
And lead her to the coral cave,
Where the blithe sedge-crown'd NEREIDS dwell.

Veil'd by a curtain's purple shade,
Safe from the glance of ev'ry eye,
MATILDA her sweet voice display'd,
And wak'd the soul of Harmony.

But oh! &mdash; what pangs her breast endur'd,
When the Queen bade th' attendant throng
Draw back the curtain which obscur'd
The heavenly minister of song.

The veil was drawn &mdash; grim Rage stood nigh,
And pierc'd the Queen with with'ring glare;
She shrank aghast &mdash; her soul-set eye
Flash'd vengeance on the mournful fair.

The veil was drawn &mdash; with trembling grace
MATILDA wak'd the choral sound;
She sigh'd &mdash; she wip'd her pallid face&mdash;
And shivering &mdash; sunk upon the ground.

Ah!  hadst thou sunk &mdash; to rise no more,
Had Death's cold hand then clos'd thine eyes;
Ah!  had some glorious angel bore
Thy pure soul to its native skies&mdash;

But oh!  my heart in pity bleeds,
Illustrious mourner, o'er thy woe;
How doth it curse those fatal deeds,
That bade the tears of anguish flow.

Oft midst these desolated walls,
Thy guardian Genius wails thy doom;
On each avenging power she calls,
And frames a visionary tomb.

"Ye woodland nymphs, a wreath prepare,
With Spring's first flowers your tresses braid;
The primrose pale and lily fair,
Shall sooth MATILDA'S injur'd shade.

"And ye, that sit enthron'd in light,
With solemn harpings swell the sky;
MATILDA'S soul, divinely bright,
Shall join the grand sublimity."

But see, thro' yonder mould'ring pile
Pale Cynthia shoots her glimmering ray;
The Muse now seeks the darksome isle,
And pours the sadly-pleasing lay.

How chang'd the scene &mdash; black Winters storm
Waves the high grass that crowns the wall;
And red-ey'd Horror's giant form
Stalks rudely thro' the desert hall.

The ivy pale, shall spread its shade,
And twining round, each arch sustain,
Long as the tottering piles decay'd,
Look scornful on the barren plain.

Yet Grandeur here diffus'd his ray,
And Pleasure once her reign began;
Where now giant Time, with ruthless sway,
Laughs at the baseless hopes of man.

Still wider from his ebon wing,
He throws Oblivion's deepen'd shade;
Whilst Genius sweeps the plaintive string,
And mourns the wreck such pow'r has made.

Oft, o'er this solemn ruin'd scene
Bright Fancy drives her flaming car,
And Solitude, with eye serene,
Sits here to mark each glimm'ring star.

When Cynthia gilds the dark'ned pole,
Oft may I seek these tott'ring towers;
Such scenes sublime the heavenly soul,
Such scenes awake her dormant powers.
