Mona! &mdash; It was a lovely morn of summer,
Clear, calm, and sweet, &mdash; in July's early day;
Just on St. Mary's rock the sun's bright glimmer,
Struck as my vision open'd &mdash; Douglas bay.
A line of streamers spread their colours gay
Upon the trembling bosom of the deep;
And o'er its wave the finny myriads play,
Skim o'er its rapid tide, then upwards leap,
Or thro' its glist'ning current move with rapid sweep.

Pitch'd on the swell, &mdash; the seaman's clear full song
Echoed from rock to rock, from shore to shore;
Stretch'd his full net, which countless thousands throng,
Glancing like dew-drops on their summer flower;
Thy little barks from cove and road-stead pour
Around each headland; and the busy eye
Wandering, amidst the silence of that hour,
Look'd up with fervid gratitude on high,
To thank Almighty mercy for his kind supply.

Mona!  then breath'd around thee many a charm,
So steals the vision o'er th' enthusiast's mind;
When the young thought entranc'd &mdash; enraptur'd &mdash; warm,
Eden's sweet bowers in each lov'd spot will find.
On ocean's breast the rising sun reclin'd,
Rose the white smoke like incense on the morn,
Straight as a pillar: &mdash; thro' thy zephyrs wind
The wave's soft hush; &mdash; so lonely, &mdash; so forlorn,&mdash;
Like the soft wail of woe from Pandion's daughter lorn.

I ask'd from heaven a gift; &mdash; the genuine charm
Of beauty by celestial sweetness led;&mdash;
A lovely vision round me wrapt its arm.
An angel's radiance floated round my head.
O'er mountain, valley, o'er thine ocean's bed
That bright eye shone on my adventurous way;
And like the flame of God round Judah spread&mdash;
When thro' the Red-sea swept his proud array,
Thou on thy pilgrim beam'd, and cheer'd his clouded day.

Life then was new to me; the rapid thought
Rush'd like a whirlwind o'er its mountain tide;
Each coming moment fresh'ning vigour brought,
Hope flush'd thro' all, and cares each furrow hide.
Visions of bliss around my bosom glide,
And life, &mdash; a glorious dream: &mdash; its plastic power
Burst into being: &mdash; 'twas the golden pride
Of Dura which I hallow'd in that hour,
Fancy's creative touch; &mdash; Imagination's flower,

Where, on thy smooth shore would thy wave repose
Basking upon the swell its magic lay;
Where, up thy crag, the storm in fury rose,&mdash;
Sparkling upon the foam it seem'd to play.
By stream  by valley's side, &mdash; by mountain grey, 
Thro' dead of night, &mdash; the morning watch along,&mdash;
The mist soft couching on her evening's ray,&mdash;
Midst hamlet's sweet retreat, &mdash; midst fashion'd throng,
My fancy's radiant being vision'd was among.

Mary!  then stols't thou o'er me, like the glance
Of lightning thro' its thunder-cloud; mine eyes
Pouring along their vision's glorious trance,
Started, as life upon that vision flies.
So Venus on the foaming billows lies,
Waking to life; &mdash; my thought no more a dream;
But, hope with new existence me supplies,
And Fancy's vision'd paradise became
Th' Almighty's gift from heaven, and not alone a name.

It is &mdash; the spirit of the past &mdash; which speaks!
Glance o'er the picture, &mdash; dare thy heart reply?
Youth's bygone aera on my memory breaks,
Lives in my mind, and glistens in mine eye.
It is thy form in youth which passes by,
No spectre nor frail phantom of the brain
But waking real life; what, you and I
Dare never hope on earth to meet again&mdash;
That past is now a dream; &mdash; and, must a dream remain.

Thou thinkst! &mdash; I know thy thoughts are often bent
Upon the past; &mdash; thou dream'st it o'er and o'er;
By night, by day, in weal, in woe, intent
On every feature of our days of yore.
Could Heaven have added to our earthly store
Of bliss? &mdash; 'Tis meet not, that I should reply;
Yet Heaven will vouch I wish'd for nothing more,
I found in thee a mine of purity,
Of love, immortal love, &mdash; that will not, cannot die.

And in my bosom burn'd, as chaste delight;
Thy torch of love, fed still its flames thro' mine;
So morning lifts the mantle of the night,
And light, and life, and heaven, thro' all combine.
And thou wert all I own'd, &mdash; and I was thine;
Mine Eden in thine arms, thy world in me;
Nature our hearts had bless'd with gifts divine,
Each varied feeling own'd its courtesy;
Its sweet enchanting grace &mdash; its loveliest imagery.

It is, &mdash; the spirit of the past &mdash; which speaks,
From all its lone unbounded gulf of woe;
Its quivering eye all conscious, trembling wakes
To former scenes of bliss with ardent glow&mdash;
Peel's lonely coast, its tide's soft trem'lous flow,
Arching like swan along the crowded shore;
Now whisp'ring thro' its caves in accents low,
Now on the castle's rock in deaf'ning roar,
Scattering its foamy sheen, along its margin hoar.

Souls of the times of old!  when there I trod
The path thy memory hallows, when to me
Spirit seem'd breathing yet beneath thy sod,
And rose the records of thy chivalry;
Olave!  with awe my mind then turn'd to thee,
What time across his mountain flood the Dane
Burst like his ocean's storm, upon thy sea;
And steep'd in blood, thy holm, thy shore, thy plain,
Peel! &mdash; and with gore defil'd thy meek and holy fane.

'Twas then a meteor rush'd along thy heath,
Lovely and radiant as the star of morn;
The voice of heaven came streaming from its breath,
And soft persuasion in each accent borne.
Such Wimund was, thy choice and then thy scorn;
The shepherd, soon the tyrant of his fold:
The radiant mitre from that brow is torn,
The crosier doff'd; and now on mail so bold
The humble monk is seen as Moray's gallant Lord.

His look, his manner, each persuasive charm
Rivet the old, the young, the rich, the poor;
To grace his floating banners thousands swarm,
For thirst of glory, some &mdash;  for plunder, &mdash; more.
Scotland, &mdash; o'er thee his eagle pinions soar,
Thy border swarm'd in blood, thy fields were spoil'd;
Tho' vengeance and dismay upon him pour,
And Mona saw th' impostor spurn'd, revil'd,
Yet Wimund liv'd and died blind Fortune's favourite child.

Poor Eleanor! &mdash; oft from St. Patrick's isle
Hast thou in misery each rude scene embrac'd!
Thy sad heart trembling thro' thy ghastly smile,
When thy proud spirit wander'd to the past;
Gloucester's rich honours there around thee cast
That splendour, &mdash; such, as from the lurid brow
Of a fallen angel, thro' the nights dark waste
Horror will mark, and shudder at its glow;
Gilding the heart's disease, a mock'ry on woe.

Now list we as the billow's thund'ring clash
Bursts headlong thro' its dark and hidden way;
Tumbling beneath its rock, &mdash; with furious dash
Winding thro' secret channels, till the spray
Mounting its prison house, blended with day,
A wand'ring Iris; and the tortur'd sprite
Rushing thro' ether from captivity,
Shot its wild star; and blaz'd its trail of light;
Bless'd its return aloft, and curs'd its years of night.

Mind'st thou the Runic tablet on the green,
Which for Invalfer's sins a mother plac'd?
How many hundred years that stone has seen!
The slab still stands, &mdash; the aera can't be trac'd.
How oft the ling'ring minutes would we waste.
To breathe a meaning on the sculptur'd stone!
Throw o'er each line a fancy, ne'er embrac'd
By her, whose humbleness of heart alone,
Thought for Invalfer, thus, a mother could atone.

'Twas sweet to wind up Snaefell's mountain height
Silent and thoughtful, midst a summer's noon,
To catch each varied swell of varied light,
And mark how liberal Nature in each boon.
The flow'ring furze bestow'd its sweet perfume,
The woodlark run its rich note overhead;
The linnet's burst along the meadow's bloom;
The black-bird from the brake mellifluous led
Th' innumerous songsters, thro' the evening's fresh'ning shade.

And sweet upon its flatten'd cone to stand;
From east to west, from north to south survey
England's fair visions, Caledonia's land,
And Morne's rude mountains, gilt with evening's ray;
And Snowdon's glist'ning verge; &mdash; the close of day
Blending with gloom Helvellyn; and the breeze
Rippling the surface of each western bay;
Whilst east and north and south a mirror lies
Polish'd and smooth, reflecting heaven's deep purpled skies.

And now the mists upon its bosom play,
Whilst fay and fairy wanton on its brow
Towers up its height to meet the sun's last ray,
His parting glance, his evening's trembling glow.
To see its shadow o'er the ocean grow;
How sweet it was to watch the gloom expand!
To view its mantle o'er the vale bestow
The twilight's charm; then mark that charm expand
Along the trembling wave, unto the distant land;

Whilst thro' the blue deep glanc'd the fisher's eye,
And swell'd the stretch'd net thro' the glowing wave;
And sparkles in the sun-beam dancing, fly
From the vex'd tribute which its bosom gave;
And joy and hubbub in confusion rave;
And o'er the scaly tribe with pleasure's glee
Hung youth and age, the jocund and the grave,
And infant paddling at its mothers knee,
Man's voice of loud command, and woman's laugh so free.

Was it not pleasure on the cliff's proud height
To track our lone way o'er th' unbeaten sod;
The surf in hollow moanings at our feet,
And not an eye to mark the path we trod?
The glitt'ring ocean warm before us flow'd,
And on its margin hung, like morning's mist,
Scotland's bleak mountains; and the sun-beam glow'd
Like angels' spirits o'er them &mdash; Dipping, kiss'd
The curlew its blue wave, so breathless, lonely, whist.

And as the night its liv'ry would assume,
And faint and fainter grew the streaks of light;
And round the bay the deep full sail would come
Like a white speck upon the breast of night;
How sweet to hear the rippling tide alight
Like currents, by their chaffing margin led!
To mark the furrow how it would invite
The bright phosphoric trail, and laughing lead
With glow-worm's twinkling eye the mariner to bed.

Yet let me trace thee in our lonely cave,
When light first dawn'd upon the morn of spring,
When round us would the glassy billows lave,
And clam'rous sea-mews flap their light blue wing;
And thro' our grot the choristers would ring,
And thou, the naiad of our dripping cell,
Freshness upon the breast of morn would'st fling,
And echo charm'd by thy resistless spell,
Upon the buoyant flood in trem'lous accents fell:

And then the flash that heaven breathes lit thine eye,
And rush'd o'er me its trembling ray of light;
And on thy white breast playful ringlets lie,
Like the thin curtain of the summer's night,
Wrapt round the day-star, &mdash; shadowing orbs as bright;
And then the ruby of thy dewy lip,
Flush'd as the mellow peach, my lips invite,
And blushing bade me of love's nectar sip,
And from its glowing fires, heaven's proffer'd treasures reap.

Where the flood sever'd on the breaker's brow,
And morning's flush an edge of crimson gave,
And midst the show'ring foam, the changeful glow
Of many an Iris started on its wave;
Youth's kindling soul would on the vision rave,
And thee, a mermaid parted from the sea,
Would deem; and that bright spot thine ocean's cave;
Then trembled I that thou would'st dart from me,
And claim thy coral grot, thine ocean's queen to be.

The moon is up!  its crescent o'er the hill
Lights mountain, rock, and deep embosom'd bay;
Now swings the pinnace o'er the current's swell,
Soft sigh the billows on the close of day.
The mists their mantle wave in jocund play;
And thro' them, point the stars their steady march;
How sweet was then the seaman's roundelay,
As mute beneath the glittering silent arch,
We list the ocean's swell, &mdash; for one lone footstep search.

Now summer's fled, and winter's hoary head
Growls round our hills, and whitens all our lea;
And mountain-torrents down the valley spread,&mdash;
Wild swells the wind, and wilder swells the sea.
Nature's appall'd! &mdash; It daunts not you nor me
Our world lies shadow'd in each other's eye:
Whistles the raging blast; &mdash; we mark with glee,
The rack'd cloud chas'd in eddies down its sky;
And list the dreadful crash from billows mountain high.

It is the spirit of the past, which speaks!
Darest thou its long and varied track pursue?
'Midst foreign climes, remembrance &mdash; panting seeks
Those scenes, where in its youth, its Eden grew.
Vivid the colours of its Iris; &mdash; true
To the bland memory of the days of yore;
Spirit, &mdash; away! &mdash; I dare not now pursue
That paradise, which thou would'st fain explore,
Wind thro' its waste of sweets, &mdash; and all its Eden's store.

The year was young when you and I first met;
The leaf had scarcely budded on the tree;
The blush of spring was on the flow'ret set,
And hearts were light, and all was mirth and glee.
Our spring fast fled, and summer's minstrelsy,
Look'd blithe, with fruit and blossom mingled still;
Then, up the mountain, down along the lea,
Came autumn with its sudden heat and chill;&mdash;
Now blows the wintry wind, all bends beneath its will.

Now blows the wintry wind; and stem and wild
Burst its dread terrors thro' its cloud of snow;
The gale is sped, &mdash; the blast of ruin's still'd,
Tho' chill the breeze, I feel the south-wind's flow.
Thine eye, &mdash; 'tis April's eve; &mdash; thy cheek's soft glow
Its blush across that evening's smiling fall;
Dread tyrant, &mdash; still! &mdash; oh!  softly round her blow
Zephyrs of balmy peace! &mdash; remove the pall
That clouds her Even of life, and winds her in its thrall.

I rush upon the shadows of that hour,
When, to thy virgin bosom I was press'd;
I view it, &mdash; as I view the drooping flower,
That blush'd its spring, but now is fading fast.
The leaf may perish by the winter's blast,
The root yet lives; &mdash; its spring will come again;
And then the blushing flower, that op'd its breast
To love &mdash; its former virtues shall attain;
Shed yet a balm o'er spring, and life and love regain.

Adieu!  the moon is up; &mdash; we watch'd its play,
On the calm surface of its sky so blue;
Its field of light has shot across our way,
When life was young, and love was ever new.
Still, I delight its journey to pursue,
Tho' rack'd its cloud, and gloomy now its sky;
Youth, love, and thee, it shadows to my view,
When thou to me wert all the world, &mdash; and I
The rudder of thy soul, &mdash; the star thou steered'st by!

Adieu! &mdash; my minstrel, like the spring of day,
Trembles her young soul with the world to blend;
Wilt thou upon her morn of infancy
With angel-smiles along that morning bend?
And like a nurse unto her nursling lend
The balm of life! &mdash; that scene has bless'd my view;
When thy chaste smile thine infant would attend,
As gush'd each fountain fair; and veins so blue
Swell'd by the stream of life, Love's cestus round thee threw.
