CAELIA.
Near to the shady brink of Eglantine,
Attentive to your Pipe, I milk'd my Kine;
When on a sudden, as the Lilly Stream,
Flow'd from my Hands, (in Fancies Dream)
Methought I heard the dreadful Sound,
Weep?  weep?  ye Nymphs, the Shepherds weep around;
Thirsis the neatest Shepherd of the Plain,
Whose tuneful Pipe, did glad each rural Swain,
Is now no more; alas, he's gone, he's gone:
Moan all ye Hills, ye Vallies make your moan.
No sooner was the first Surprise away,
Again I listned to your pleasing Lay;
But found, alas, you too again, was hush,
And streight the Kine, ran furious thro' the Bush.
All Nature seem'd to run in frantic Mood,
Loud blow'd the Winds, and lowly bow'd the Wood.
With eager Steps to Collin then I ran,
For what's weak Woman, to the Strength of Man?
Your Lambs neglected, by their Dams forsook,
Ran bleeting adverse by yon murmuring Brook.

COLLIN.
Caelia too true, alas the Fates decreed,
Thirsis no more the woolly Flocks shall Feed;
As to the Flocks, I gave my constant Care,
The very Sound you mentioned reach'd my Ear.
Then streight aside my tuneful Pipe I laid,
Sweeter no Shepherd to his Love e're play'd;
For what is Music when young Thirsis's dead,
With him all Joy, and Merriment is fled.
Then streight the Flock unheeded by me stray'd,
Skipping and bounding to the watery Mead;
I saw them grazing on the ranky Grass,
Unmov'd, I gaz'd, my Actions lock'd in Brass;
Tho' to their Bane the rich Repast they eat,
Yet unconcern'd I left them to their Fate:
For what's the Flocks when Thrisis fair is dead,
Droop, ye Lillies, ye Cowslips hang your Head.

CAELIA.
Is Thirsis dead, adieu my Rake and Fork,
The Gifts he gave me in my early Work,
Daftly he sung the Sweets of blooming May,
When in the Meadows we were making Hay;
And a gay Garland of the blooming Thorn,
He'd bear before us to our Work each Morn;
Then at the Maypole, when our Work was done,
To cheer with Merriment, the Harvest home;
The Lads and Lasses to his jocund Strains,
Drown all their Cares, and ease their laborious Pains;
But what is Mirth, now Thirsis fair is dead,
Droop, ye Lillies, ye Cowslips hang your Head.

COLLIN.
As from the Fields Yestreen I bent my Course,
High on the Beachen Tree the Raven Hoarse!
With screaming Omen pierc'd my listning Ears,
The Owlet too enhaunc'd my gloomy Fears;
The fluttering Batt to assail'd my Cangle-light,
And huming Beetles brush'd me in their Flight.
When on my Pillow I was sleeping laid,
I was a dream'd, (of Dreams I'm sore afraid)
Thirsis, methought, stood to my gazing sight,
Like the peel'd Willow, his Garments too was white.

CAELIA.
As in the Dairy I was making Cheese,
The Window that ore' looks the Lawrel Trees,
Flew ope, and streight appear'd in View,
My Thirsis form'd, as in my Dream I drew,
I shriek'd aloud, and streight appear'd a Sight,
Thirsis to help me, all array'd in White;
His cheerful Looks, away methought was flown,
And in a Swoon I sunk a down?  a down?
Droop ye Lillies, ye Cowslips hang your Head,
Thirsis the Shepherd now alas is dead.

COLLIN.
As Yesterday we all sat down to Meat,
Surpris'd I saw, and streight I bless'd my Seat:
A luckless Number feasting at the Board,
Child, says my Grannum, bare that in Record,
So sure as Six and Seven's in one Room,
So sure to one Death is their certain Doom;
And straight her Words came then into my Mind,
Which is too true by Thirsis now we find;
For of that Number, he alas is dead,
Droop, droop, ye Lillies, ye Cowslips hang your Head.

CAELIA.
The other Day I took me to the Wood,
And from my Nose ran just three Drops of Blood;
Amaz'd, I turn'd, the Thunder roar'd aloud,
The forked Light'ning pierc'd the sable Cloud;
The Minster shook, the hallow Winds did groan,
Trembling I stood aghast, and all alone:
At length beneath a spreading Oak Tree Shade,
Free from the Storm I sought its friendly Aid;
The heavy Clouds in Torrents pour'd amain,
The Flocks and Herds were in the Meadows slain;
Huge Massy Trees from off the Mountains rush'd,
Mills, Rocks, and Cottages were in its Motion crush'd;
This, this, was Pastime to the Loss we bear,
Thirsis no more can ease our troubled Care;
Droop ye Lillies, ye Cowslips hang your Head,
Thirsis the Shepherd now alas is dead.

COLLIN.
Caelia no more, this doleful Theme pursue,
I've lost a Brother, and a Sweetheart you;
We'll plant some Roses on his silent Grave,
And on his Tomb Stone thus we will engrave,
"He conquer'd all, and now to Death's a Slave.
