O'er the long lapse of ages to look back,
To wind and wander thro' each dark recess,
The mind's untutor'd feelings there to track,
Rambling o'er nature, rob'd in simplest dress,
'Tis sweet! &mdash; and then those savage virtues guess,
Which, ripen'd by the autumnal touch of time,
Lose not their bright primeval loveliness,
But cast their rough rind, and a charm sublime
Sweeps o'er them! &mdash; May my muse unveil that generous prime!

Deep in the frozen regions of the north,
I then beheld thee, Scotia! &mdash; as of yore;
Towering majestic o'er thy billowy Forth,
Flashing thy lightnings round thy stormy shore:
Above thee, Ossian floated; and the power
Of song from Selma wak'd again the brave;
And Loda's might from Scandinavia, bore
Thy fearful glories: &mdash; o'er thine ocean's cave
His dreadful spirit hung; &mdash; then trembling roll'd thy wave.

His beard was whiter than the driven snow;
Seem'd it the foam which round his Hebrides
The whirlwinds breathe; and from his eyes' red glow
Started a flame, as from the topaz blaze.
So glares the red sun thro' a morning's haze;
Like Alpine skies in winter's northern night,
So streak'd his furrowed face: &mdash; a meteors rays
Embrac'd his forehead; and the ambient light,
Pure as the path of Heaven, evolved its floods so bright.

O'er Scotia's sea-girt throne he bent his might,
Flashing around her, streams of radiance flow'd!
Hush'd was the stormy north-wind; and the light
Of Heaven's meridian met his awful nod.
Upon her brow a beam of glory rode,
The radiance of her sons; &mdash; and by her side
Stern Independence stood; and look'd abroad
O'er mountain, vale, and ocean's stormy tide;
She sunk within his fold, as would a blushing bride:

Before her eye a magic glass was plac'd,
Which both the past and future held to view;
And there, the virtues of her sons were trac'd,
Whose fires like pent volcanoes stronger grew.
That eye, the lightning's rapid flash, she threw
Where flagg'd the Roman eagle's fainting wing;
As up the Grampian toiling, to pursue
The awful echoes which around him ring;
Its haggard's fearful glances made it backward swing.

Above her, &mdash; but the naked vault of Heaven;
Around her, &mdash; storm; &mdash; the cold &mdash; the barren heath;
Her wood, &mdash; her Druid; &mdash; to whose mind was given
The power of inspiration, and its breath.
And curl'd the ice-cloud up her mountain-path;
And from its torturing volume glanc'd an eye,
Which, like the angel of Almighty wrath,
Sprung on the soul of life; &mdash; then down her sky
Rush'd Independence; &mdash; soon, the foeman fled his cry.

Pillar'd beside her stood he, like the rock
Lifting its steep front o'er the mountain-wave,
Firm in the heavings of its ocean's shock;
Towering, &mdash; the billows round its bosom lay;
The toiling eddy trembles; &mdash; on its grave
Of foam, dark spirits lean; &mdash; the waves back fly,
In convoluted circles; &mdash; murmuring, rave
The angry whirlwinds; &mdash; from the depths, on high,
The bleaching storms are chas'd; &mdash; and muttering pass they by.

Rush'd he across her Firths? &mdash; Her waves reply,
Bending their billows to their wintry shore;
Along her wilds he roamed; his piercing eye
Kindled, as shook her heath, its purple flower.
He flam'd a meteor o'er her fields of gore;&mdash;
He breath'd; &mdash; and Heaven obedient to his nod,
Op'd the recesses of each hidden store;
And, thro' the crimson of their evening cloud,
Smile would each hero's ghost, as thro' its mist they rode.

What pass &mdash; what height &mdash; what forest &mdash; or what glen,
Sends not its dread memorial far abroad?
Boil'd high the blood of each advent'rous clan,
Erect they stood, and bent alone to GOD.
Majestic stept they! &mdash; Earth they lightly trod
Their eye, their heart, their soul, proud Scotia!  thine;
How many thousands sleep beneath their sod;
Unknown, unnoticed tho' life's swift decline,
Whose record might have been for future times &mdash; a sign!

Needs not the blazon of thine ancient fame,
To blow the trumpet of thy dread renown,
Thy glories brighter live, &mdash; as solar flame
Bursting from sleep, &mdash; refresh'd &mdash; more vig'rous grown.
Heroes of former times!  thy wreaths are thrown
O'er the broad summits of each cloud-cap'd mound;
Nor stole thy sons thy fires; &mdash; they boast their own;
From India's torrid climes their names resound,
To where each frozen pole in wintry horror's crown'd.

Thy path was glorious! &mdash; glorious still its shine!
Who has not heard of Scotia's mountain land?
As thro' their length'ning course deep streams refine,
Brighter from age thy radiant flames expand.
Where pours the Nile upon her Egypt's strand,
Thy name shall live, if virtue ne'er can die!
And Abercromby's spirit there shall stand,
(Like the canopus of the eastern sky)
A pharos, &mdash; lighting up Gallia's deep tragedy.

In days of yore, &mdash; when yet thy fields were waste,
And o'er thy dreams the memory of thy sires
Would come, like sun-beams thro' an ice-cloud trac'd,
Melting and radiant, and their blush like fires
Holy as Vesta's, &mdash; as the flame which spires
Red as the cresset, from its beacon's height;&mdash;
In days of yore, &mdash; these dreams, like angels' lyres,
Wak'd unto glory, stole upon the night,
And bore the list'ning spirit to etherial light.

Thy mountain then spread out its giant's form,
Thy rock stood frowning o'er the vale below,
Thy cataract of foam, like winter's storm,
Swept down thy pass, like arrow from the bow:
And the harsh winds of heaven, in fearful flow,
Rush'd onwards; met their shrieks thy daring soul;
And when thy sun shone forth in winter's glow,
And wreath'd the clouds their black and angry scroll;&mdash;
Rock, river, mountain, stream, the winds, as burst their roll,

In angry whirls, along the threat'ning sky,
All spoke a language to the boiling blood,
That inspiration, fastening on the eye,
Deem'd, in its mountain-rock, its toiling flood,
Its mist which o'er the foaming cataract stood,
The warrior of departed days still there;
His wild eyes flashing thro' these scenes so rude,
Kindling to flame; as bursting from his lair,
His spirit rush'd abroad, to feed thy mountain air.

'Twas awful, from thy glens of virgin snow,
Where, rose the lone hut by the fretting rill,
To hear the muttering night breeze trembling throw
Its eddies, rock'd by silence, round its hill.
To mark the cold and spectral moon-beam spill
Its ray upon its broad stalactic rock;
And Fancy, wandering o'er thy northern chill,
Catch fairy visions from each ice-clad block,
And deem thy Genii there, where'er their lightnings broke!

How lovely then, to watch thy blue eyed maid
Her softer radiance on the cold beam throw
To watch her star point down the winding glade,
To light her thro' her wilderness of snow!
Red bursts the moon, and waves the bloody glow
On Alpine height &mdash; that fearful echo hark,
As speeds the cross of fire the clansman's blow
A thousand flames now shiver from one spark,
Light as meridian floods, and now as midnight, &mdash; dark!

She listens! &mdash; hears a footstep on the heath,
Quick, as the pulses from her bosom dart;
She stops, &mdash; she harkens, &mdash; and her panting breath
Flows round the billows of a bursting heart.
"Alice, farewell! &mdash; I dreamt not we should part!"
Her lips receive his last impassion'd kiss;
The yells of battle on the mountain start;
And now 'tis calm, as on the fields of bliss;
The world of spirits, theirs; &mdash; they've bid adieu to this.

Ye! &mdash; over whom a thousand years have past,
Yet, can I trace you on your lonely hill,
Up cataract's foaming arch, up mountain waste,
Thro' dark deep pass, along yet darker rill;
Thro' mists long leaning on your winters chill;
When o'er the ridges of you frowning steep
Scowl'd the black forest's brow, &mdash; and breathless, still,
Round and around, rush'd silence, like the sweep
That takes the thunder cloud, when lightnings from it leap.

Now, thou lone crag, &mdash; thou tyrant of the glen,
Whose cloud-cap'd head primeval worlds has seen,
Bald is thy crown, and savage is thy ken,
Where once thy forests wav'd in Summer's green.
The mountain deer upon thy rock still lean;
Sweep they like meteors o'er thy ridge of snow;
Like the sharp moon, whose horns of silver sheen,
Emerging from their cloud, with sudden glow
Glimmer, &mdash; then veil their light, &mdash; and all is dark below.

Yet, o'er these ridges, crown'd with cliffs of snow,
A wizard rises; &mdash; stern and grim his air,&mdash;
A gnarled oak, deprived of bark and bough,
Him, times remotest still have witness'd there.
He, the last remnant of the wild boar's lair,
Stands, like the withering spectre of the night,
On whom the sheeted dead, with hollow stare,
Fix their glar'd orbs, &mdash; proud of his ancient might,
His prostrate woods he views, like heroes fallen in fight.

His throne, &mdash; 'tis silence; &mdash; and his wild domain
One lifeless dreary solitude; &mdash; around
Hush'd are the sleeping skies; &mdash; his ancient reign
Lost, like a far off dream in night profound.
Close by, a lake, &mdash; veil'd by a rocky mound,
Whose dead swart pool, his deep divining glass,
In which the past is trac'd, the future found,
And on the bare crag leaning o'er the mass
Of waters, towers his eagle, &mdash; guardian of the pass.

The clouds that blend their horrors on its breast,
And blacken all beneath; &mdash; the winter's rush,
In fearful tempest, when the sunless crest,
Rocks, &mdash; and the valleys fear some sudden crush;
Summer's unclouded hue; &mdash; the lonely hush
Of morn and even, serve that wizard's spell
And thro' each dripping cave and gorse-clad bush,
Thro' every winding of the lonely fell,
Songs of old times revive, &mdash; echo prolongs their swell.

How lovely!  o'er these glens of virgin snow,
To dream of bygone days, those times explore,
When high born-spirits, flashing freedom's glow,
Burst like the wild winds o'er their ice-clad shore,
To view the proud unbending man of yore,
Rude, firm, unshaken in his head-strong way,
With mind untutor'd, skill'd in nature's lore,
His generous bosom open as the day,
Leaning on Heaven's bright cope, and cherished by its ray!

Thy path was in the whirlwind, and thy breath,
The lightning's touch; &mdash; thine eye, &mdash; the tempest's flood;
Thy word, &mdash; an angel's pledge; &mdash; the blast of death
Burst in its dread convulsion, at thy nod.
And where thy foot on hill or valley trod,
Thy step was firm; &mdash; thine air, a monarch's crest;
Tho' lodg'd in cavern hoar, thy spirit rode
Above thine eagle's ken; &mdash; mind, feeling press'd
Towards the vault of Heaven; &mdash; and Heaven alone address'd,

Ah!  then that spirit was the soul of fame,
Rich in the treasures of thy powerful mind;
Harsh tho' thy features, hardy was thy frame,
Thy freeborn sons &mdash; the first of human kind.
For independence only could thee bind:
No iron bondage chain'd thy daring hand;
Thy soul roam'd freely, like thy wintry wind,
And tho' thy rock was naked, and thy land
Barren; &mdash; the hearts it nourish'd knew each virtue bland.

A day of storm was thine; &mdash; the storm has past
Spring's halcyon breath is shower'd on winter's tread;
And thy clear streams embosom'd are, at last,
In valleys, glist'ning from their emerald bed.
And the bleak hills, on which our fathers bled,
Wave their brown ringlets o'er the golden grain;
And thy deep bays, with floating cities clad,
Launch joyous on the surges of the main,
The riches of thy floods, the treasures of thy plain.

Peace smiles upon thy vales, &mdash; sweeps up thy hills,
Art's plastic hand adorns thy lovely bowers;
Thy tractless wilds &mdash; yet fed by pebbly rills,
Thy mountains &mdash; scented by their purple flowers.
The heath-cock's call, there &mdash; morn and evening &mdash; pours;
The erne finds yet its aerie on their crest;
And silence also dreams its lonely hours;
And the like storms of yore that swept thy breast,
Frown; &mdash; but where nature gloom'd, find now a flowery vest.

And where that mind, and where that stubborn heart
Which ages nourish'd in each wild retreat?&mdash;
Temper'd and soften'd! &mdash; o'er each zone they dart
Their influence, and each virtue emulate.
Patient and cheerful in each changing state;
Children of every clime, abroad they roam;
From Pole to Pole pursue their hidden fate,
Dream of their birchen bowers, their Alpine home,
Midst polar snows, &mdash; midst suns that fire the equator's dome.

But the same blood which in their fathers' veins
Boil'd, &mdash; in their offspring will its course pursue;
And nature, whilst its vigor still remains,
The same warm blood will to its task be true.
Thy mountain spirit, Scotia!  round thee drew
Almighty Freedom; &mdash; hark! &mdash; its hallowed strain
Smiling upon thy rock's grey breast, she grew,
Spread like the winds of heaven, o'er hill and plain;
And bore aloft that mind, &mdash; never to fall again.

Scotia!  thy lone and silent hills I view,
As the mind's eye thro' promis'd bliss will swim;
The whispering of thy floods I still pursue,
Like the rapt seer in his wand'ring dream,
Thou com'st upon me, like the sun's last gleam,
Soften'd yet splendid: &mdash;  on its sloping ray
I mount; &mdash; and, lighted by its purpl'd stream,
Look on the days of old! &mdash; Attend my lay!
And may thy spirit wing me on my adventurous way!
