If to sublimer heights we may not rise,
Nor visit stars, or venture up the skies;
The muse in meads, the lowly flow'rs among,
Delights to meditate the Sylvan song;
Nor blushes to be found amid the swains
In shades, enjoying with the shades their strains.

In the same vale, in Judah's purest air,
Two youthful shepherds tend their woolly care;
Their years, their pastimes, and their arts the same,
Alike their manners, as alike their fame;
On the same lawn their mingled sheep they feed,
At the same spring to wat'ring friendly lead;
Their no less-friendly dogs sleep side by side,
And scanty meals in gentle sort divide;
The blithesome swains in music pass the day,
In music lull the ev'ning hours away.

It chanced (their flocks secur'd, their sheep-folds pent,
Themselves on each his peaceful home intent)
Along the meads with silent pace they came,
Led by the murmurs of a neighb'ring stream.
The reeds were quiv'ring to the evening breeze,
And the low sun far glimmer'd thro' the trees:
They stopp'd, and seated on the bank, dispute
Whose hand in music was of chief repute.
Each thought, tho' each had known his friend so long,
His harp and voice superior in the song;
They stake, what most they prize, the ribband blue,
(Their maiden's gift) that ty'd their sabbath shoe.
But who decides, such wagers since they lay?
None could be seen, for credit then they play:
And whose the credit, some might hap to tend
Mean whiles that wayward, and the contest end.
Their trial was, no trial so small I ween,
In "things to come," which was the deeper seen;
These SYMLIPATE, those HIRMO did rehearse,
And thus proceeded in alternate verse.

SYMLIPATE.
Much I am out, or times have reach'd mine ear,
When younglins shall not run though wolves appear.

HIRMO.
Days have I heard of, when in gentlest wise,
Down, harmless with the lamb, the lion lies.

SYMLIPATE.
Skip, oh!  ye Calves!  if prophet's sing aright,
You and the bear in grazing will unite.

HIRMO.
Bound, bound the kids for you!  an infant's hand
Shall lead the leopard in a grassy band.

SYMLIPATE.
I gather herbs &mdash; a season some foretell,
When those all die that make the finger swell.

HIRMO.
All flowers my hands collect &mdash; begin that year,
On sunny banks, when snakes we need not fear!

SYMLIPATE.
My love eats honey &mdash; Sybills wise foresee
When combs are dropping found in every tree.

HIRMO.
Mine sweet of cowslips &mdash; O!  rise that spring,
When bees, they tell her, shall forget to sting.

SYMLIPATE.
Lillies my maiden please &mdash; and I know where
I fetch her handfuls, and she calls me dear.
But Simlipate has read a pleasing tale,
That lillies clear shall whiten ev'ry vale.

HIMRO.
My fair-one's favourite is the damask rose&mdash;
I do not say at present where it blows;
But right if Hirmo deems, there comes a year,
When on each hedge such roses shall appear.

SYMLIPATE.
The tiller's toil may turn the furrow's now,
And slaving oxen drag the cumb'rous plough;
But kindlier sun shall some day rise, and corn
With golden crops the field untill'd adorn.

HIRMO.
In ev'ry land now wicked war may rage,
And all the world in madding arms engage;
But soon to pruning knives the swords will bend,
And spears in ship-hooks innocently end.

SYMLIPATE.
Thro' all our plains the greatest frauds shall fail,
No crook be sought for stol'n in any vale;
The happy season is not far away,
On our own pipes when we unenvied play.

HIRMO.
When swains no more, who strive in rival song,
No more shall fear from faithless umpires wrong;
When ev'ry judge, to nicest justice true,
Shall give the prize to whom the prize is due.

SYMLIPATE.
All cannot see &mdash; Oh!  soon may he be born,
Who eyes will open sightless and forlorn!
For such a babe descends from heav'n, they say&mdash;
Tell what's his name, and I give up the day.

HIRMO.
All may have tongues &mdash; not all the pow'r to speak,
But into song then ev'ry tongue shall break;
No where his birth?  I ask on what glad shore,
Divine the place, and I content no more.

SYMLIPATE.
Whatever town is favour'd with his birth,
That be the joy and wonder of the earth!
For he restores those happy times of old,
Restores that ancient age, that age of gold;
O!  might I live to see his peerless day,
His praise my highest sounding harp shou'd play.

HIRMO.
Meek as our lambs, and harmless as a dove,
Yet wiser than a serpent shall he prove;
Oh!  smil'd his mother on him now!  the while
As pleas'd, he pretty answering smile with smile.
That fields could give me, ev'ry choicest flow'r
O'er his auspicious cradle would I pour.

SYMLIPATE.
But shepherd look ye!  thro' the skie a light!
Above the brightness of the moonshine night!
The sun is set &mdash; I saw his after ray
That reddens in the clouds, e'er while decay.

HIRMO.
See yonder see! &mdash; it seems another sun&mdash;
Beneath the shining how the shepherds run!
What means the wonder?  haste we after, swain&mdash;
Sleep, sleep our lambs!  we quick return again.

Thus sung the swains, unwitting, on the grass,
The times they sung of, then were come to pass:
What light they follow'd, where and what befell&mdash;
Or whom it shew'd them, Lippet need not tell.
