Now Term's return'd, again the crazy sound
Of bell half-crack'd, proclaims the hour of pray'rs;
Assembling duns the sported oak surround,
And useless plate lies rotting on the stairs.

Now loungers dull their matin rounds begin,
Now cheeks of half-starv'd scouts begin to bloom;
The rattling plates, and clashing glasses din,
Speak the full hall, and crouded common room.

Now down the far-fam'd High-street's crouded walk,
Stalks in slow pace the solitary Ralph;
With useful scorn regards the sneering talk,
The pointed finger, or the rude loud laugh.

Now many a freshman grim, of form uncouth,
The cub, half-grown, of some rude rustic bear,
Trips by his father's side, a hopeful youth,
Array'd in Sunday cloaths, and lank long hair.

Low his long coat in doubling volumes reaches,
With swelling sleeve, that dangles to and fro;
That with broad friendly flap to guard the breeches,
And this to give its wearer room to grow.

Behold him trembling 'fore the black-stol'd throng,
Which frighted freshmen with such terror view,
While fond papa proclaims in whispers loud,
"My Jack has read Cordery through and through."

Yet soon the youth forgets his rustic bent,
Laughs at the stiff-wigg'd strutting of the doctors,
Ticks with the tradesmen, thwacks the Ralphs in Lent,
His tutors mimic, and defies the proctors.

Audacious he, soon thinks it no disgrace,
When Kit from closet rears his hateful head,
And with quick hand, and grinning Gorgon face,
Lugs from a pocket sly citations dread.

See where the traces of a midnight rou,
In recent marks on staircase foul remain;
Where broken chairs in ruin sad lie low,
And many a fallen stone, and fractur'd pane.

Some stranger passing by, with wily air
And cautious hand a shatter'd fragment takes;
Then bids his son of riots rude beware,
"These Oxford scholars, boy, are horrid rakes."

Shall I remember, in far time to come,
When age has spread his wrinkles o'er my brow,
Quick travelling to the all-devouring tomb,
The happy, happy hours I spend here now,

Or think how fast the golden moments flow,
As Cynthia's rays upon the silver stream,
Fair as the flowret's diamond crest of dew,
Fair as the visions of a morning dream.

Hail!  lion proctor, hail too, jackall pro',
With gracious bow my homage due receive,
Hail, mighty pam of academic loo,
Hail, negro majesty of velvet sleeve.

How oft, like mouse from fierce Grimalkin's paw,
With trembling feet of fear from thee I've fled,
When passing, in thy Sultan frown I saw
Jobations, crosses, impositions, dread.

Will memory find, where I so oft was wont,
On Isis' stream to ply the frequent oar,
Sad Rosamunda's lonely tomb to haunt,
And dream I saw her tread the pebbled shore?

How oft awaken'd by ambition's calls,
Smit with the fond, the dear desire of fame,
I've scribbled verses on the boghouse walls,
And carv'd on wainscots, chairs, and stools, my name.

Haply some curious wight, in future time,
My worn initials on the wall may see,
And ah!  where then my hopes of fame for rhyme,
May ask, unthinkingly, "Pray, who was he?"

Bless'd be the man who then shall kindly say,
"I've heard him mention'd once, 'a strange young dog';
Who'd waste, in scribbling rhymes, the live-long day,
You've seen his verses, doubtless, in the bog."

Oft would his wiser friends tell him to chuse,
(For wiser friends sure know what lore is best)
Studies of profit for the threadbare muse,
Was by the sons of want alone profest.

Thus job'd, his wiser friends but job'd in vain,
The youth disdain'd, and their advice was nought;
He still pursu'd the dull poetic strain,
And neither logic read, nor logic wrote.

In vain did Prudence point to system plann'd,
Did Poverty with famish'd eye-ball stare,
Ambition wave his shadow-grasping hand,
And small-ey'd Avarice knit his brow of care.

His strains, perhaps &mdash; for verses publish'd he,
(Odd things does fate sometimes together join)
With many a sprig of straying flower you'll see,
Portmanteau's sage and learned boxes line.

Yet think not ill of Clubbs's neglected rhymes,
Though of fame's far-resounding voice they miss,
Precepts too good they held for such bad times,
Too moral verses for an age like this.

At him nor let the critic's growl be hurl'd,
But with the action learn to view its ends;
Like others, though he wrote to mend the world,
He publish'd only to oblige his friends.
