STREPHON.
Why does Alexis still dejected look?
Why does his hand incessant hold the crook?
A prey to care, and each unpleasing theme,
His sorrows real, and his joys a dream.
When the sun sets, and all his charge asleep,
No times for recreation will he keep:
The once companions of his leisure hours;
Hear him no more display the mental powers;
But lost to self, and friends, in silent gloom,
See his best days, and prime of life consume.

ALEXIS.
Confin'd to narrow bounds, pensive I move,
I lost my freedom when I lost my love;
Low, melancholy themes, my thoughts employ,
I'm dead, as 'twere, to ev'ry human joy;
While thou, my friend, bless'd with a beauteous bride,
Canst sit, and chat, and fondle by her side;
The sallies of her wit oblige thee to be gay,
She kisses care, and smiles the hip away.
O!  happy lot, prize such a virtuous wife,
And thank good Heav'n for the best boon in life.

STREPHON.
And such a boon, my friend, is in thy reach,
Oh!  do not, do not, Providence impeach.
I grant you lost a great and gen'rous friend,
Faithful in every instance to her end;
Lovely her form!  engaging in her mind!
And all that grace the sex in her conjoin'd.
She's gone, and happy, spare thy fruitless tears,
Nor vainly waste in grief succeeding years;
Hear reasons lore, and reassume the man,
Again be happy on the nuptial plan.

ALEXIS.
Ah!  where's the widow kind, or gen'rous maid,
That will take pity, and the widower aid.
A mother-in-law! &mdash; this terrifies the fair,
They see an evil, tho' no evil's near;
Where dangers truly are, they blindly run,
As vanity directs the sex are won.
O!  then desist, nor urge a scheme so vain,
Single I am, and single must remain.

STREPHON.
Alexis, hold, run not your charge too high,
Nor from particulars to gen'ral fly;
This as false logic all the schoolmen hold,
To vindicate the sex I dare be bold;
Virt'ous and wise there are, and not a few
Who pant for bliss, and properly pursue;
These know, that Circumstance is not the thing,
Where that bids fairest, misery may spring.
True bliss consists "in Union of the soul,
The same their Byas, and the same their pole."
Add, if you please, "a moderate degree
Of wealth, below the lures of luxury,
And yet above the fears of poverty."

ALEXIS.
Thy definition's good, and notion just,
Some few there are so dignify'd, I trust;
But on what spot of earth those fair-ones dwell,
I own my ign'rance!  can my Strephon tell?
O lead me on to this Elyzian soil,
With more than thanks I will repay thy toil;
With more than rapture to such arms I'd fly,
And faithful to such int'rests live and die.
