Celestial nine!  who taught the sounding lyre,
To sing a cobler's, or a monarch's fire;
The soul-fetch'd sigh with elegance to heave,
In prose to whimper, or in rhyme to grieve:
Again strike up the melancholy strain,
And teach, O teach me sadly to complain:
Kind interjections graciously bestow,
The plaintive Ah!  and lamentable Oh!
While "sighs" and "dies" perform a mutual part,
And join in chorus with a bleeding heart.

White-Conduit groves, and loaf-consuming bow'rs,
Where oft I've pass'd the fondest of my hours,
You heard with joy the lover of my choice
Abuse the waiter with the loudest voice:
Then saw him turn importantly on me,
To spread the butter, and prepare the tea.
In your blest shades, O kindly let me mourn,
A gown all greasy, and a cap all torn;
And what is worse &mdash; O how my hair is tost!
A rival's triumph, and a lover lost.

O faithless Buskin, unrelenting youth,
Is this thy boasted constancy and truth?
Where now's the look that fondly could excite,
Each nameless glow of exquisite delight?
The borrow'd speech that softly could engage,
And all the insipid sweetness of the stage?
The tender strain that delicately hung
On fancied Romeo's imitative tongue?
The humble accent, and the bended knees
The grasp emphatic, and the raptur'd squeeze?

O fatal night, when first I saw that face
Out-shine the tawdry tinsel of thy lace;
So sweet you look'd, so tenderly you play'd,
You pierc'd the easy bosom of the maid:
Persuasion sat with love upon the part,
And quickly found a passage to her heart:
Soon was my work thrown negligently by,
My bosom tortur'd with an aching sigh,
The patch forgot to settle on my face,
And raise some spot secluded into grace.

No borrow'd bloom upon my cheek was spread,
Or blush that deepen'd with a studied red;
But pining grief and melancholy care,
Swell'd in my eyes, and languish'd in my air;
My former peace unfortunately stole,
And struck a pleasing sadness thro' my soul:
My business now grew hateful to my sight,
I sigh'd and long'd impatiently for night;
Shone in the box, whene'er you play'd a part,
And broke my fortune, while I lost my heart.

But O how blest!  when you perceiv'd I burn'd,
To see my fondness tenderly return'd;
Where did I stop my sentiments to prove,
Or shew th' unbounded greatness of my love:
The three blue bells in Russel-street can tell,
No doating woman ever lov'd so well:
Thy home, false youth, these tickets can expose,
Say, who releas'd the crimson suit of cloaths;
Redeem'd from pawn the breeches and the hat,
Or bought the shirts and stockings &mdash; tell me that?

Yet O forgetful Nancy has possess'd,
The highest place in that ungenerous breast;
She now can seem engaging in your sight,
And charm your easy fancy.  What a fright?
Why, both her eyes stand gogling in her head,
Her breath's quit odious, and her hair quite red:
The scurvy too has studded o'er her nose,
And then, good Lord &mdash; how she does turn her toes!
Perfidious wretch!  tho' fatally disgrac'd,
I laugh to view the object of your taste.

Of sense, of wit, of decency bereft,
Blush, blush, and see the woman you have left;
Was it for this &mdash; how gladly would I stop,
Ye gracious Pow'rs!  I parted with my shop:
The sweetest house, the most convenient stand,
And tipt you all the ready in your hand:
Was it for this I swore thro' thick and thin,
And all my honest creditors took in?
White-wash'd, when all my struggles had been past,
To be forsaken, and despis'd at last?

But this new outrage shall be dearly paid,
See what a frightful spectacle I'm made?
Yes, Mrs. Nancy, justice shall take place,
For all these various bruises on my face;
My cloaths all torn in tatters on my back,
My lips all bloody, and my eyes all black.
To Justice Wild, immediately I'll run,
(I know at once how business may be done)
Depose against the lady and her spark,
And quickly nail the justice and the clerk.

Thus sadly mourn'd, in fair White-Conduit's grove,
A wretched fair one of unhappy love;
Whose rival nymph offended in that place,
Had left the marks of vengeance on her face;
While Buskin laugh'd to see them both expos'd,
Yet never once politely interpos'd,
Till her opponent Nancy taught to yield,
And bravely stood the mistress of the field.
For brandy call'd most resolutely bold,
And drank a quartern, to avoid a cold.
