Now hush'd the noisy tumult of the town;
Now slowly home the sons of pleasure creep;
Now some (unequal fate!) on beds of down,
Whilst others on bare boards are doomed to sleep.

But Love, dire foe to Morpheus' pleasing sway,
Refus'd poor Tom that sleep he ill could spare,
Who, in his smack thus tun'd his amorous lay,
And breath'd his sorrows to the midnight air:

"O fairest nymph of Billingsgate's fair crew,
With thee sweet maid what Wapping belle can vie;
Sleek as an eel, but ah!  as slippery too,
Sound as a roach, and sweet as salmon fry.

"How beats this heart, just tho' my ribs 'twould break;
To stop my ears, but ah!  in vain I strive,
When'ere I hear her lov'd harmonious squeak
Of Mackreel!  Mackreel!  all alive!  alive!

"Heavens how I gaze!  oh, how this bosom glows!
How can I paint the ectasies I feel,
How peeping thro' her old black worsted hose,
Her slip-shod shoe displays her naked &mdash; heel!

"Talk not to me of bosoms white as snow,
Mere tricks of art to hide a sallow skin:
Can rouge, cosmetics, lotions, e'er bestow,
That healthful bloom which follows drinking &mdash; gin?

"This gives her cheek the sweet carnation's dye,
Paints with the diamond's blaze her blushing &mdash; nose,
Adds fire and vigour to her sparkling eye,
And gives her breath the fragrance of the rose.

"Oh, with what lustre beams her pea-green eye,
For Heaven in pity gave her only one,
But there such darts and laughing Cupids lie,
Would for my comfort she were bless'd with &mdash; none.

"Almighty Love!  before I felt thy sway,
No shark possest an appetite like me,
Now like a shrimp I'm grown I pine away,
Just like a salmon that has left the sea.

"These hands which labour never once could tire,
Now peg'd like lobster's claws won't reach my head,
I sigh like cockles roasting at a fire,
Flat as a flounder, as an herring dead."

Thus sang poor Tom, and heav'd two piteous sighs,
'Till wearied nature woo'd her last repose,
Sleep shed her poppies o'er his closing eyes,
And Thames-street echoed to his vocal &mdash; nose.
