Aonian Muses, let my ardent soul
Thine animating genial fire imbibe,
And glow with inspiration all divine,
Whilst I the merits of the NEEDLE sing!
But not that Needle which directs
The roving mariner thro' seas unknown,
And, by a power magnetic, always points
To frozen Zembla's shores; nor do I sing
That other Knitting-Needle height, tho' they
Doubtless do deserve more copious praise
Than I can well bestow.  I will confine
At present my advent'rous lay to that
Most useful Needle, which is chief employ'd
By Jantee Taylor, or by Sempstress trim;
That curious little Syclop, unto which
All owe such universal benefits.
Sure it deserves in gratitude a verse!
Thou pretty, slender, polish'd instrument!
Who can commend thee to thy true desert?
Or who enough can thy inventor praise?
But thy inventor is (alas!) forgot;
He lies obscur'd in dull oblivion's cave,
Hid by the dark Gothic gloom of night.
Fain would I penetrate th' impervious shade
That veils his name, and call it forth
To shine the foremost on the list of fame:
But that is now deny'd; nor can the Muse
Dart thro' the cloud one faint enlight'ning ray
To guide us in the search; nor will he chaunt
A strain fictitious, nor a notion broach
Of vain surmise.
To thee she turns the strain,
And strives to make thee live in lasting verse:
Thou tiny implement, unthinking man
To thee conveniencies innumerous owes!
Without thy aid could tinsel shine in lace?
Or clothes new-fashion'd in the crouded Mall?
Alas!  how little thinks the powder'd beau,
While he is strutting in his birth-day suit,
And lost in admiration of himself,
And of his tawdry embroider'd coat,
That it is to thy friendly aid he owes
The gaudy trappings of his boasted dress!
Altho' thou hast thy kind assistance lent
To deck his person; tho' without thy aid
He could not shine in well-wrought button-hole,
Or gold-lac'd hat, he scarcely deigns to think
That there is such an instrument in being.
But mark the contrast of this light-brain'd beau!
Observe the deep-read sage, with formal phiz
And solemn step advance; each object round
He views with philosophic eyes; his coat,
Of antic cut, and rusty sable hue,
(As he deduces causes from effects)
Does not unnoticed pass, but he remarks
Each various change it undergoes, progressive
From the fleece unto its recent form.
Nor art thou in this nice review look'd o'er,
But he revolves with scrutinizing mind
Thy great utility; for well he knows
That every manufacturer doth ply
His labouring art in vain, and leaves his work
A shapeless undigested mass, 'till thou
(By hand of Taylor guided) join each part,
And from a seeming chaos form a coat.
In meditation thus, with arms entwin'd,
And look directed to the ground he walks
Along the street; when lo!  perchance his eye
Beholds thee glancing near the kennel's edge,
Swept by the careless 'prentice from the shop
Of haberdasher. &mdash; Oh!  unworthy plight!
He stops, &mdash; nor hesitates, but snatches thee
From thy impending ruin:  on his sleeve
He places thee with care, with grateful heart,
Retentive of thy numerous services.
Then homeward bends his steps, there to repose
His aged limbs, and from his feet to clean
The spattering dirt.  While he is thus employ'd,
Ah!  fatal chance!  the brush a chasm rends
In his well-worne hose; now thy aid he calls,
And now, &mdash; when optics on his nose
Are plac'd with careless trembling hand,
And yard of worsted's thro' thine eye convey'd,
Thou help'st him to repair the hapless breech.
Nor let us, 'midst thy good qualities forget
How thou thy kind assistance lend'st to Kate,
As by the fire she mends her tatter'd shift,
Or darns with nicest art her Roger's hose;
Whilst he, in Morpheus's chains fast bound,
Sits snoring by her side insensible.
Now she applies thy point with gentle touch,
And wanton leer, unto his arm or thigh,
Up starts the drowsy clown, and in revenge
Imprints a thousand kisses on her lips.
But oh!  how blest, how happy is thy fate!
When my Priscilla's pretty fingers guide thee
Thro' all the mazes of embroidery.
Directed by her lilly hand you lead
The silk of vivid hue, with curious art,
To form the mimic flower; or thro' the thin
Contexture of transparent lawn your pierce,
And follow'd by the finest thread you place
The Brussels border round the flower'd scarf:
Or now, assisted by her matchless art,
The ruffle you adorn, and o'er the wire
You fix the spreading gawze:&mdash;
And now, perhaps, (oh!  envied situation!)
You are on her kerchief stuck,
And kiss that lovely spot
Her soft, enchanting love-inspired bosom.
I charge thee not to touch that seat of bliss,
Nor with rude scratch to wound the throne of love.
But were I to rehearse each quality,
Each various point, in which thou dost excell,
My verse should mount to kindred strains with those
Of that immortal bard whose comic lay
Hath fix'd the splendid shilling on the roll
Of never-dying fame; or I should need
That lively, smooth, and easy flow of words,
In which the Pin by Woty is display'd:
But I can ne'er acquire those happy powers,
That strong, expressive dignity of style;
So with a wish I here must end the song,
Where'er thou art, or of whatever size,
Whether in hussy, or enamell'd case,
Adorn'd with gold, or form'd of humbler wood,
Whether possest by Chloe, or by Kate;
Oh may'st thou ever meet with the regard
That richly is thy due, and never more
Be slightly look'd on, or a trifle deem'd!
But, equal to thy great importance, may thou
Ever be each beauteous maid's delight!
May the loose novels, and the vague romance,
(Insidious sappers of the virtuous mind)
Neglected lie upon the dusty shelf!
Whilst thou alternate with domestic care,
And social converse, a well-chosen book,
And harmless mirth, employ their happy hours,
And guide them smoothly o'er the stream of time.
