I hate each slave to vice, nor will I call
One man my friend, save in whose well-tun'd heart
True genius reigns, and ev'ry virtue dwells.
Ye sons of dullness, who dare ape my form,
And make my various charms the sport of fools,
Be far from hence, nor ever dare approach
My hallow'd shrine!  but come, ye favour'd few,
Of virtue warm, and listen to my tale,
For I can lead you thro' her favourite paths,
And point her loveliest features to your view.

Greece owns my birth.  With bards and sages old,
Immortal sons of fame, I long remain'd,
'Till fixt at length in Albion's happy clime,
Mankind without reserve my charms enjoy.
I shew how order from disorder sprung,
How first from chaos old the jarring seeds
Of nature at the voice divine repair'd
Each to its place, 'till rosy earth unveil'd
Her fragrant bosom, and the joyous sun
Sprung up the blue serene&mdash;
&mdash;I waft the soul
To Heav'n's empyreal mansion, and display
The glorious state of Angels thron'd in bliss!
I visit oft the gloomy realms below,
And, by the glimmering light of livid flames,
Behold with horror the tremendous fate
Of guilty souls, who in a deluge roll
Of ever-burning sulphur, unconsum'd!

I've taught mankind the ways of wand'ring stars,
The depth of Heaven above, or earth below;
The various labours of the changeful moon,
And whence the eclipses of the sun proceed;
Why flowing tides prevail upon the sea,
And in what dark recess they shrink again;
Examine all the properties of herbs,
Fossils, and minerals, that th' embowel'd earth
Numerous displays.  My magic charm of old,
When Asia's Lord bor'd the huge mountain's side,
And bridg'd the sea, to battle rouz'd the tribes
Of antient Greece; the sons of Cecrops rais'd
Minerva's Aegis; Lacedaemon pour'd
Her hardy veterans from their frugal board,
And Thebes saw Xerxes shake thro' all his tents.

I know each winding of the human heart,
From what mysterious source the passions flow;
Whence terror, rage, and jealousy proceed,
Or love or pity springs, I present am
When o'er the stage the ghost of Hamlet stalks,
Othello rages, poor Monimia mourns,
Or Belvedera pours her soul in love;
By me alone those scenes affect the heart.
I can exalt the soul to solemn thought,
And heavenly musing, on the marble tomb,
Which holds the dear remains of some brave man.
I love to sit, and with my tender tale
Draw tears of sympathy from every eye.
Dione!  oft within thy gentle breast
I raise the heaving sigh, full often melt
Thy soften'd heart at pity's tender tale,
Or tune thy soul to love.  I oft attend
The wand'ring footsteps of the youthful bard,
When nature's kind'ling breath his genius fires.
With Shakespear, nature's bard, I us'd to soar
O'er high Parnassus.  On the fruitful banks
Of Avon, still my rosy fingers cull
Fresh flow'rs and dews to sprinkle on his grave,
Where all day-long I sit, and tell mankind
Their certain doom, and all creation's fate.

Great was my love for Eden's famous bard&mdash;
Swift as his boundless thought full oft I've rov'd
O'er Eden's flow'ry paths; have oft explor'd
Erebus' gloomy shades; or, soaring far
Above the low regard of earthly things,
Into the heav'n of heav'ns, I have presum'd
An earthly guest, and drawn empyreal air.

I walk'd with Thomson in the rural shade
Delighted, and explor'd each orient drop
That glistens on the thorn:  each leaf survey'd,
Which autumn from the rustling forest shakes,
And mark'd its form, and trac'd in the rude wind
Its eddying motion.  I with Chaucer dwelt,
Whose wit judicious pleas'd the varying mind,
And Spencer, sportive fancy's pleasing son!

Sometimes o'er hills, white with unnumber'd flocks,
Pensive I rove; or thro' gay meadows walk,
Or vineyards hung with luscious fruit &mdash; and lo!
Where'er my fingers touch the fruitful grove,
The branches shoot with gold; where'er my foot
Marks the glad spoil, the tender clusters glow
With purple ripeness!  View heav'n's azure arch,
Where numerous orbs, as thro' the wide expanse
They roll, attune their Great Creator's praise&mdash;
&mdash;By me more bright those heavenly orders shine,&mdash;
And fill with greater awe th' enraptur'd mind.

To trace my charms thro' ev'ry winding maze,
And point each feature to the obvious view
Of wond'ring man, were endless as to count
Each chrystal drop which morning's dewy hands
On the gay blooms of rosy May distill.
Yet oft where shameful ignorance resides,
Men call the various truths which I display
The dream of folly; &mdash; but their thoughts are vain,
And impotent their tongue; &mdash; for, while the sun
O'er the green earth sheds his prolific beams,
And tunes th' harmonious spheres; while Cynthia spreads
Her silver radiance o'er the gloom of night,
While social sympathy dissolves the soul
In pity, or in love, I still shall please
The heart where heav'n-born virtue deigns to dwell.
