If wishes were not idle air,
Thus to the Gods I'd breathe my pray'r.
Oh!  father Jove, be pleas'd to send,
The sev'ral items underpenn'd.
To make thy vot'ry independent;
Fortune not over large, but decent,
Not twenty thousand pounds, nor ten,
"Five, sirrah, I suppose you mean then,"
Not so your godship, give me clear
Four or five hundred pounds a year,
And of your high behests observant
You'll find me still your humble servant.
A house far from the noise and smoke
Of Leadenhall and Basingstoke;
Far from the jobbers of 'Change Alley,
Far from the beaus of Picadilly,
From Smithfield, Lloyd's and the Old Bailey;
Some dozen miles from this great city,
In Kent, in Middlesex, or Surry;
No matter for the spot exactly,
So 'tis fram'd neatly and compactly;
Though if I chose, and you'd so will,
It should be built on Richmond Hill,
Behind the house a garden trim,
Where I, the wayward child of whim,
May rear at my capricious leisure,
Cabbage for use, or flowers for pleasure.
Exotics rare for summer poesy,
And fruits for the dessert so cozey.
Parlour and kitchen requisites,
That when I dine with friendly cits,
They may admire my domicile,
And say, "the fellow lives in style."
Glasses for dining and for ball room;
A lamp to grace the entry hall-dome;
An eight day-clock to go tick-tack,
With ev'ry other little nick nack,
I mean of all domestic stuff,
From bed to frying pan, enough.
A study fair, on all sides shining
With well-bound books, the noblest lining;&mdash;
There let me see erudite Cochran,
And full in view wise doctor Buchan;
Let when diseases dire attack me,
No Galen should be near to back me.
Franklin's directions to get wealth,
And Solomon's sure guide to health;&mdash;
Lyttelton, Hale, and Lawyer Coke,
With Burns, on Justices, no joke;
Old Bunyan, deep and allegorical,
And Phillips, light and metaphorical;
Bible, with comment thereupon,
From Adam to the dream of John;
Hervey's Reflections, Fox's Martyrs,
Some physiognomy, Lavater's;
Chaucer and Spenser, in black letter,
To me the antique types read better
Than those for which the present rage is,
That boldly stare from hot-press'd pages.
Massinger, Marlow, classic Ben,
Will Shakspeare, first of bards and men;
Otway, a noble hand at pathos,
And Butler, most sublime in bathos;
Virgilian Dryden, gentle Gay,
Elegant Pope, Pindaric Gray.
With caustic Swift, and him whose page
Refin'd the manners of an age;
And all those other knights of quill
Who've dealt in prose or rhyme with skill.
With these adorn my study shelves,
While censor of the learned elves,
Sam Johnson, burley, stiff and proud,
Spouts morals to the silent crowd.
This latter item soon provide,
That I may feast till satisfied,
On Shakespeare's flesh, and fowl, and fish,
Addison's variegated dish;
The Dean's high flavour'd haunch, Gay's trout;
Fielding's brimm'd can of English stout;
The Rambler's beef, and Goldsmith's veal,
With Chaucer's game, and Butler's eel:
Milton's etherial champaigne;
Olives, none better grow in Spain,
Gather'd by Smollet, and to finish,
Thomson and Co's dessert and garnish.
Now would I beg the cream of blisses,
For such, old cloud compeller, this is;
A wife, most worshipful, I mean,
My heart's delight, my fancy's queen,
The lady of my choice must
Be fashioned of no common dust,
As for her purse, 'tis no great matter,
For I could never cringe or flatter,
Or vow that in deformity,
Bright Helen's beauty I could see,
Waive face and shape, and teeth, and so on;
I boggle not at trifles, go on;
If miss is beautiful at heart,
For white and red we shall not part.
Not but I sometimes like to sip
The honey of the pouting lip;
Not that I slight the snowy breast,
Or cheek of nature's bloom possess'd;
Not that I ever shall detest
The white hand, or the slender waist;
When virtues grace the young and fair,
Rare qualities appear more rare,
And beauty we may justly reckon
In ev'ry case a great addition.
If Jove, the maid thou giv'st is witty,
And ugly, well; and well if pretty;
But whether she be fair or black,
In shape of Venus, or a coal-sack,
Promise me, ere my ribs I sever,
True beauty in her heart for ever.
Such wishes, if kind heaven would grant 'em,
Wife, books and house secundem artem;
I'd breathe, most gentle reader, trust me:
But Jove is old, and deaf, and crusty,
Nor will he realize my dream,
'Till people learn to wish by steam.
