TYRO.
We fled, PISCATOR, to the trees in vain;
The trees, half naked, of slow Spring complain.
With ague's trembling hand her bow'rs she weaves,
Which rugged winter rifled of their leaves.

PISCATOR.
Here, TYRO, from the rains and blust'ring wind,
We and the beasts a welcome shelter find,
Some gentle swain, the harmless angler's friend,
Rais'd this low shade for charitable end.
Heav'n bless his sylvan cares!  may peace abide
Under his roof, and slumber at his side!

TYRO.
Sweetly the morning smil'd, the sky was fair,
No ruffling gust disturb'd the quiet air.
I hop'd the perch would feel the warming ray,
Rise from the deeps, and tire our hooks with prey;
But, cold and rough, rush'd down a sudden storm,
And furious show'rs the troubled streams deform.

PISCATOR.
Hope oft deceives us, like the lying gale
Which from her port decoys the merchant-sail.

TYRO.
Ill the raw angler brooks this peevish day.

PISCATOR.
Shut, shut your engine; for we must obey.

TYRO.
But ere from hence, with bright'ning skies we part,
Indulge my wishes, and explain your art.

PISCATOR.
WALTON could teach, his meek inchanting vein
The shepherds mingles with the fisher's strain:
Nature and genius animate his lines,
And our whole science in his precepts shines.
Howe'er, to fill this little void of time,
And titillate your ear with rhime,
Receive, in brief epitome, the rules
Anglers revere, the doctrine of their schools.
First, with discerning eyes your engine view,
Of yielding hazle, or of strong bamboo.
With nice proportion, in their bulk and length,
Its limbs be shap'd, for beauty and for strength:
Tough, taper, flexible, well form'd to strike
The pigmy minnow and gigantic pike.
Such are the virtues of this peerless wand,
A brother's gift, which decorates my hand;
His darling once obligingly resign'd,
The lov'd memorial of his loving mind.
Your line, or by the spinning worm supply'd,
Or by the high-born courser's hairy pride,
Of gross or subtle texture, must obey
The might or weakness of your destin'd prey.
Be rich in steel, by dex'trous VULCAN tam'd
To barbed hooks, for stubborn temper fam'd.
Some authors have, with cumbersome parade,
Dull pages of inveigling baits display'd.
But in six words the shrewd temptations lie,
Fair paste, bright worms, and well-dissembled fly.
Thus arm'd with implements of death, beware
Ill omen'd seasons and unfav'ring air.
When Sirius drinks, when the defrauded mill
Mourns empty springs, and all her wheels stand still,
When aether blazes, and the wat'ry scene
Presents the picture of the blue serene;
Or when fierce rains discolour'd currents swell,
At home the fate of vent'rous fools foretel.
For then close-sheltring weeds, or creeks obscure,
Fearful or faint, the finny tribes allure.
But show'ry clouds and southern gales excite
The gamesome mood, and edge their appetite.
Yet, as the peasant, when his timid eyes
Suspect each sign of weather he espies,
The seed or sickle from his field detains,
And, fondly, of his desert barns complains;
So superstitious anglers watch the wind,
Now BOREAS chills; now EURUS breathes unkind.
Blow, BOREAS, EURUS, but nor loud nor cold;
Angler, go forth; with high assurance bold.
Believe a tepid season, and partake
Large booty from the river, pond, or lake.

TYRO.
Thanks to my gen'rous master, much I owe;
Yet swell the debt, one pleasure more bestow.
Carol that song, which warm'd, by gentle charms,
My bosom with the love of angling arms.

PISCATOR.
Time calls us hence, but, pliant to your choice,
I yield, tho' music never tun'd my voice.

THE ANGLER'S SONG.
Me no pleasure shall enamour,
Swimming in the drunkard's bowl;
Joy that ends in strife and clamour
And in sorrow drowns his soul.

Sports of mighty NIMROD'S chusing,
All your mischief's I will shun;
Broken bones and grievous bruising,
Glorious scars by hunters won.

Come, thou harmless recreation,
Holding out the angler's reed;
Nurse of pleasing contemplation,
By the streams my wand'rings lead.

When I view the waters sliding
To their goal with restless pace,
Let me think how time is gliding
In his more important race.

On the flow'ry border sitting,
I will dip my silken line;
And weak fish alone out-witting,
Curse all other sly design.

Milky kine, around me gazing,
Woolly flocks, on distant hills,
Join your notes, with mine, in praising
Him, whose hand all creatures fills.

When musk odours, heart-regaling,
All the morning mead perfume,
From the new-mown hay exhaling,
I'll the fisher's wand resume.

Yea, when autumn's russet mantle
Saddens the decaying year,
I will fish, an I will chant, till
Feeble age shall change my cheer.
