Oh chequered fortune!  how thy hand
Has laid the proudest empires low!
Thy frown like lightning scathes a land,
And leaves it &mdash; pyramid of woe!
Ah!  stranger, look on Afric's shore,
Her day of joy &mdash; her triumph's o'er&mdash;
Does not her plain, all desolate,
Arrest thy wandering eye, to wail her hapless fate?

And 'mid this chaos of distress,
Colossus of the destitute!
See Carthage sits, lone, tenantless!
In weeds arrayed, with blood imbued!
From her defiled and drooping head
The cheering smile of day is fled&mdash;
She recks it not &mdash; for her night's cloud
Has brighter charms &mdash; it veils her in a solemn shroud.

The stars are met, &mdash; in silver pride
The crescent orb shines o'er the wave;
Silence and sleep, twin sisters, glide
O'er the bushed world, mute as the grave.
And all is still serenity,
Save where the prowling lion's cry
Calls forth his fellow plunderers,
To rifle the lone tomb. &mdash; Accursed revellers!

As lightning from yon ruin now,
'Scaped from a cloud&mdash; the lamp of night
Shoots down its ray &mdash; What sombre brow
Meets its cold gaze?  Alien from light,
Who, Carthage, on thy lonely base,
Takes up his darksome dwelling-place?
In frantic converse with the wind,
He sits, in miseries enthroned!  in woes reclined!

Those features wan, that fiery eye,
Those furrowed lines of deepest thought,
Depict a man of misery,
A soul with pride and vengeance fraught,
Those pangs that flash athwart his brow,
Sparks struck from fires that lurk below
That downcast yet revengeful air
Proclaim some mighty fallen, &mdash; some child of deep despair.

'Tis he, 'tis he!  couched on the stone
Like murderer o'er the reeking corse;
'Tis he, stern Marius, dark, alone,
Big with impenitent remorse!
His was the lottery of life,
As shipwrecked sailor in his grief
He oft turns towards his shattered wreck,
Would that in glory's storm he'd perished on her deck!

Ah!  he in youthful hardihood
Had quaff'd the cup Ambition gave,
Had panted for the fields of blood,
And snatched the laurels of the brave;
Arms called the youthful warrior forth,
And valour, struggling into birth,
Had borne him first in war's dire race,
And bade him smile, unawed at danger's Gorgan face.

But ah!  his draught of happiness,
Too soon exhausted, left behind
The nauseous dregs of bitterness,
The after-portion of mankind!
His long lapse of resplendent light
Is closing in a double night,
While, writhing in Despair's fierce throes,
He breaks the solemn gloom &mdash; to vent his teeming woes.

"Gods, is it thus?  My wretched soul
Do I yet breathe?  Is fortune's beam
For ever fled?  Dark memories roll
O'er my drunk brain!  Are they a dream?
Or has this beacon of the world
Been raised but to be downward hurled?
The demigod of victory,
Ambition's offspring weaned for ruthless misery?

"Ah!  yes, to anguish I'm allied,
And tears are bursting their control;
Congeal their drops my wounded pride,
Be strong!  be strong, my tortured soul!
But thou art wretched &mdash; that curst thing,
Sylla, the nursling of thy wing,
Still, blasphemy of nature's laws,
Pursues thee once his lord with angry vulture's claws.

"Detested alien from mankind,
Seared by the ruthless blast of grief.
My limbs are withered, &mdash; sport of wind,
They tremble as the falling leaf.
The arm that shone 'mid battle rage
Now droops the palsied limb of age;
The voice that thundered on the foe
Now echoes to the owl a deeper plaint of woe!

"But shall I vent the selfish groan
O'er my hard doom, when at my feet
A gasping world lies overthrown,
Buried in ruin and defeat?
No, skeleton of Afric's queen,
O'er thee I'll mourn, appalling scene.
How woe-begone!  Once boast of men,
Thou holdest now the bear thy lonely denizen.

"Shrine of sunk glories!  Renegade
From fame's enrolment!  canst thou lie
Torpid in ruin, undismayed,
With look of clay-cold apathy?
Where is thy pristine high renown&mdash;
Thy awful sceptre!  spangled crown!
Alas!  the ivy's sickly shade
Now winds a cold tiara round thy head decayed!

"Thy towers are wrapped in ruin's shroud,
And totter 'neath a weight of woe,
Yet they can tell how strong and proud
They saw crushed nations pass below!
Yes, where yon arched colonnade
Spreads for the wolf its horrid shade,
Where the lone tiger passes by,
All once was crowded mirth and bright festivity.

"Relics of splendour!  Oh how hid!
How sunk are all thy glories here.
Where once sat wealth &mdash; a pyramid
Now marks a nation's sepulchre!
Thou Icarus of states!  thy pride
Is fallen and gulphed in Fate's dark tide,
And why still floats thy misery
Sink down, ye ruins, &mdash; sink to bleak nonenity!

"The watch-tower of the wilderness
How dark, how dun, you pile appears?
Seared by the lightning of distress,
It sinks in night &mdash; the wreck of years.
Dark ruin seated on its wall,
Is this her mighty capitol?
'Neath its cold shade hyaenas dwell,
While with a drooping head it bids its pride farewell.

"Farewell!  farewell!  an echo dread
Repeats it &mdash; and farewell, ye brave,
Who here are mouldering &mdash; mighty dead,
Who buoyed her up on fortune's wave.
Peace to your manes!  may no rude
Intruder break your solitude,
Marked by a pile that time derides,
A fit sarcophagus for patriot suicides!

"But where am I?  My brain, my brain
Is turned in sorrow &mdash; sympathy
O'er Carthage desolated plain
Has torn me from my misery;
But now again my woes appear,
Grief and despair their foreheads rear,
And cry 'weep not o'er others' fate;
Weep for thyself &mdash; thou art more dark, more desolate!'&mdash;

"More dark? &mdash; Avaunt, ye fiends?  they lie
For ever shrouded; &mdash; o'er their tomb
Stern Fate has stamped eternity&mdash;
And is it thus in my dark doom?
No! &mdash; Inspiration whispers no!
Marius shall see an end of woe,
His day of power again shall rise,
His sun of glory ride triumphant through the skies!

"The dark horison of my hour
E'en now is tinged with orient light,
And present woes, as spring-tide shower,
Form but a rainbow of delight;
Hail, Embryo Vengeance!  soon a world
Shall tremble at thy flag unfurled;
Colossal Rome shall prostrate be,
And gaspingly re-echo, MARIUS, VICTORY!"
