There lies the wreath-and-helm-surmounted bier,
Where slumbers Freedom's wizard-bard &mdash; the chief,
Whose rainbow mind bade Hellas cease to fear,
There sleeps he fall'n in his young summer leaf;
Mark you the wild, unostentatious grief
Of the funereal city, and the eye
Of Missolonghi's beauty, on whose brief
But dazzling dreamings burst the gathering cry
Of men who look'd and ask'd, and fear'd to get reply.

Mark you the rocky hearts of Suli there,
That idol-chieftain's chosen citadel,&mdash;
Their fiery eyes dilated with despair,
For him they serv'd and lov'd so wildly well;
And darkly too the word of terror fell
Into thy heart, Albania's mountaineer!
For fondly did thy hope of freedom dwell
Upon that star of promise &mdash; and the tear,
His summer-presence dried, flows doubly quick and clear.

Free let it fall, the bosom's gushing rain&mdash;
For Hellas' gladdening soul was unprepar'd
For this tremendous shock weep on, tho' vain
The anguish of thy heart, for thou hast shar'd
Like me &mdash; like millions, of the hope that rear'd
Its angel vision in the patriot's breast;
'Twas but a light that flash'd and disappear'd,
And here we meet &mdash; Oh God!  to see our best,
Our dearest chieftain borne to his eternal rest.

Hellas!  who now shall soothe the bickering souls,
That boast and yet defile the name of Greek&mdash;
Who now will blush while the heart's current rolls
In shame and sorrow down his guilty cheek?
Who when Ambition &mdash; Envy &mdash; Discord break
The bond that strong as adamant should be&mdash;
Who then, like oracle of old, shall speak
With worshipp'd voice, and bade for thine and thee,
The yielding hearts unite, and strike for liberty?

Alas!  alas for us!  yea even for all,
That we are doom'd, Defender of our Right!
To see thy setting and survive thy fall,
Ere thou could'st show the promis'd land of light
Whither thy harp and voice even now invite!
Yes!  tho' that harp and lip are mute and cold,
The obedient tones that felt thy magic might,
And the sad tale of Hellas' glory told,
Roll on the weeper's ear, as e their witchery roll'd!

BYRON'S gigantic genius drew its fire
From out the Alpine lightnings, and its might
From the loud living thunders; and its ire,
Chang'd to disdain, from his internal blight
Of heart, and all of beautiful and bright,
From fountain &mdash; flow'r &mdash; lake &mdash; star &mdash; and moonlit glen:
He, to young Love's luxuriant delight,
Was the ador'd Apelles of the pen,
And with a wondrous skill search'd the dark minds of men.

The tainting nothingness of all that wears
An earth-stain in its nature, and grand
And stern sublimity Religion wears,
Darken'd or shone beneath his master hand;
Life's treachery &mdash; when like a lake unfann'd
And glass'd with tempting brilliancy &mdash; was torn
From its deceitful sleep at his command,
And conquering truth became as 'twere reborn,
And brightening into strength like a young summer morn.

If from the crowd that wonder of our age
And glory of our country turn'd away,
Treading his own mysterious pilgrimage,
Spurning the world and shunning its array
Of gilded folly glittering mid decay,
Like a magnificent ruin scatter'd o'er
With sunbeams, which in brightening but betray
Thro' the green ivy, columns rent and hoar,
And serve but to illume its desolation more;&mdash;

If from those scenes where folly &mdash; fashion &mdash; fame
Revel as tho' the soul were wanted there,
To turn away, be but to earn the name
Of misanthrope, O!  quickly let me share
That enviable title! &mdash; few feel here,
In this world, the fellowship of love;
The friend will mingle with thy wrongs his tear,
And yet doth he a very Judas prove:&mdash;
How oft, tho' young its years, gainst such this heart hath strove.

That blackening pang his festering bosom wrung,
Which all men knew, but one alone could feel,
Deeply the poison'd shaft his spirit stung,
Opening "a wound which time could never heal;"
Then rang the tongue of slander peal on peal,
Till the responding world belied again,
And perfidy long struggled to congeal
That glorious heart.  Who thus would live mid men,
Even as a tortur'd lion when spears beset his den?

Of this enough!  the shuddering heart grows tir'd,
Tracing the perils of this billowy life.
He who hath into solitude retir'd
From the world's wiles, and the volcanic strife
Of those convulsing crimes with which 'tis rife,
Hath wisely done!  this sublunary vale,
Who hath e'er trodden, and escaped the knife
Of rancorous calumny?  Where storms prevail,
Few the returning barks unshatter'd by the gale!

He was not "altogether of such clay"
As fellow-man, nor was his mind the same
As they possess: &mdash; too far above decay,
Too bright, too glowing with immortal flame
Increasing in his strength, till he became
The spiritual compeer of those who gave
To immortality a worshipp'd name.&mdash;
The wise &mdash; the free &mdash; the noble and the brave;
Whom tyranny defiled not &mdash; man could ne'er enslave!

With these he held communion; these alone
Were sharers of his reveries sublime&mdash;
Temple &mdash; tower pillar &mdash; statue breath'd a tone
Of their past glory, and their memory, Time
Tho' a long length of years, in every clime,
Hath rob'd in everlasting freshness.  Man
But heard and felt and bow'd &mdash; but since her prime
Nature beheld no loftier spirit than
His, who that wond'rous course of gloom and glory ran.

And who could breathe that spirit-stirring name
My essay's inspiration &mdash; nor entwine
Its hallow'd memory with the kindred theme
Of freedom's children, which his songs divine
Hath rung thro' every breast chain-bound like mine?
That name is an imperishable part
Of Hellas' history!  in his decline
His latest prayer was for her, and the dart
To which his life-veins flow'd transfixed her weeping heart,

My own poor suffering Greece!  alas she feels
Deeply and deadly the destructive blow,
Which, breaking her protecting shield, reveals
Her naked bosom to her bloody foe.
The gathering storm, around &mdash; above &mdash; below
Waits but the &mdash; hark!  its thunders are unbound.
War's lightnings flash &mdash; skies glare and red bolts glow&mdash;
Expiring shrieks and crackling flames resound;
And domes descending crash, tearing the smoking ground.

Ipsariots do your liberties expire
Tamely?  must ye but blush your fathers bled?
Your waves all lightning and your fields all fire;
Fierce &mdash; red and fleet the levelling flame is led.
Oh!  for "a remnant of the Spartan dead!"
To snatch the thunder from the tyrants' hand
And hurl them downward to that fiery bed!
But the red element's burning arm expand,
Blackening the fated isle, and spread from strand to strand.

Vain is the hope &mdash; the prayer &mdash; the shriek for life,
Of those who bend beneath the shock of war
When no brave foes contend in noble strife,
And vengeance only guides the conqueror's car;
Even the wild cry of woman will not mar
The step of desolation!  Vengeance' laws
Annul humanity's &mdash; and fierce and far
If she fly on, nor yet some phalanx draws
A barrier of defence, her sabre knows no pause;

But on and on, and madly on she flies,
And drinking seas of blood cries out for more,
Unsated till her quivering victim dies,
Or her wild thirst be slak'd with her own gore.
And thus, Ipsara!  round thy ruin'd shore
Did the remorseless fiend of vengeance dash,
Till agony's shriek was silenc'd in the roar
Of war's exulting thunders, and their flash
Saw thy high fortress fall with a volcanic crash.

Thou stand'st in ruins mid those classic isles
Whose names, like History's sunlight, shine afar&mdash;
Confederated tyranny reviles
Thy feelings and thy God &mdash; but can they mar
The whelming shock of thy avenging war?
Thou hast done nobly, cheek'd the Moslem's strides,
And struck from Slavery's hand the scimitar;
Few more such glorious deeds, and Freedom rides
Triumphant o'er the Aegean's undisputed tides!

Nurse of creation's mightiest!  not in vain
The broken statue &mdash; the demolished wall&mdash;
The prostrate column and the ruin'd fane
Fresh to the hearts of Hellenists recal
Their children's bondage and their country's fall!
Offspring of hero-fathers!  wave and plain&mdash;
Mycenae &mdash; Salamis &mdash; Athens &mdash; Argos, all
These soul-exciting monuments retain&mdash;
Broken is the tyrant's bow, and burst the bonds man's chain.

Yes!  every step of thy celestial clime
Is peopled with bright recollections!  not
A temple &mdash; column &mdash; tower or tomb, which Time
Hath not all razed or ruin'd, but is fraught
With some proud lesson, some ennobling thought;
There is a wordless eloquence which speaks
To the charm'd soul from each enchanting spot;
A spirit and a spell whose magic wakes
In cities &mdash; plains and groves &mdash; mountains and hills and lakes.

Here stand the tombs that sepulchre the sleep
Of Lacedemon's immolated band&mdash;
Here Salamis' victorious waters steep,
Amid the mountain Titans of her strand;
There Simois wanders thro' the desolate land
Unlike that rapid river which of yore
Shook with the strife of Phrygia's thousands, and
Wheeling its sounding way all swoln with gore,
Limbs &mdash; trunks and grappling foes on its red waters bore!

The vast Acropolis &mdash; the Parthenon&mdash;
In awful desolation both appear!
How is their beauty fall'n &mdash; their glory gone
The temple plunder'd of its statues fair
Which none should e'er behold but to revere,
Sculptur'd by Phidias' school.  The hand of Time
Hath not alone effected ruin there,&mdash;
Man, who should guard each relic of that clime,
Hath shamelessly destroyed its monuments sublime!

Yet thou need'st not those records of far time,
Those monumental glories, to inspire
The enthusiastic spirits of thy clime
With indignation and ancestral fire!
The son is not unworthy of his sire!
The chain &mdash; the scourge &mdash; the Moslem's reign of woes
Thy spirit's long suppress'd but quenchless ire,
Like Hecla burning mid her clime of snows,
These rous'd thy lion-heart to spring upon its foes!

Dread was Ipsara's vengeance as her fate;
With freedom's own gigantic strength it fell;
Her glory like her ruin consummate,
Has been a Siroc to the infidel.
But to the bright immortal isles that dwell
In ever living beauty round her shore,
Her name has been regeneration's spell.
Vain is the Islam thunders' fiery roar.
Once more art thou redeem'd &mdash; thy fetters burst once more!

Thro' the rous'd world had the electric tone
Of liberty gone forth, Greece could but share
The common glory, but she now alone
Crushes the Hydra in his reeking lair,
While to her mounting fame the jealous stare
Of an allianced despotism still clings,
Beneath whose blighting influence none can dare
Look up from where the hell of slavery wrings
Life's life from out the heart, to prop the throne of kings.

The pander of oppression may exclaim,
"Greece is unfit to class among the free!"
Had she not seiz'd her brand and bow, the same
Might be repeated to eternity.
'Tis Tyranny's subterfuge &mdash; strike on and be
What thou wert, when less polish'd Tyrants brought
Nations to force thy pass, Thermopylae!
Thou living record of red wonders wrought,
When men sprung into life as freedom's votaries ought!

When I recal the inauspicious voice,
With which thy trembling Liberty first woke,
Bidding thy sons arise &mdash; awake &mdash; rejoice&mdash;
Dash off their bonds &mdash; annihilate their yoke,
The inspiring shout they utter'd when she spoke,
Their quick revenge &mdash; their valour's fiery play,
Which, as the thunder fells the mountain oak,
Shatter'd the Moslem's arbitrary sway,
And smote him to the dust whom they did once obey;&mdash;

When I remember all, and turn to those
Who say that Freedom's light falls premature&mdash;
When I recal the long endured woes
Which made thy very slumbers insecure,
I marvel how thou could'st so long endure
The taunt &mdash; affront &mdash; oppression &mdash; injury
Of peace, and fame, &mdash; the murderer &mdash; the impure,
Making with unrestrain'd impunity
The very home a hell, where only heaven should be!

He who could weep upon his chains should never&mdash;
Never subject his feelings to his lot,
But let them, like a storm-obeying river,
Boil till th' expanding soul be too o'erfraught
For longer suffering.  Who, that like thee fought,
Deserves not that maturely glorious boon,
For which the coward never sigh'd or sought?
Strike on &mdash; strike deeply &mdash; strike like men who've thrown
Life &mdash; hope &mdash; home &mdash; freedom &mdash; all, on their own strength alone.

The God of freedom aids thee &mdash; can'st thou fear
The cause of Freedom fires thee &mdash; wilt thou yield?
The arm of Freedom guides thy onward spear,
And victory lights thy path on foam and field;
To Heaven's propitious throne thou hast appeal'd,
And Heaven bath plac'd the thunders in thy hand,
Before whose way thy withering foemen reel'd!
O!  could I see thy freedom's sun expand,
Mother of arts and arms!  gilding thy classic land&mdash;

O!  could I see it, how exultingly
I'd yield my soul beneath its sacred light
As in oriental climes the dying Parsee
Expires with a more dreamy, calm delight,
If his Sun-Deity, from his dazzling height
Shed glory on his death &mdash; O Heav'n!  may I
Ne'er feel my spirit's plumage stir for flight,
Till Hellas' Freedom from her stormless sky
Shed glory on its path &mdash; then shall I calmly die!

Monarch of Song!  couldst thou behold that day,
And see our banner's folds in freedom soar,
And hear our triumph-cannon's thundering play,
Along lost Scio's rocky island roar,
Telling the martyr sleepers round her shore,
That Greece and Greeks at length have reach'd the goal,
For which, thro' fields of flame and floods of gore,
They fought; then would thy exultation roll
The clouds of agony back that gloom'd thy parting soul.

Yes!  to the minstrel-martyr 'twas a hell
Of inward suffering, to be torn apart
From her, for whom he breath'd that wizard spell
Which rous'd the slave's and fir'd the freeman's heart.
Who that hath laid the noblest &mdash; holiest part
Of his affections upon Freedom's shrine,
Would not at victory's shout of triumph start
Away from thoughts of darkness, and resign
His spirit with a will less human than divine?

He had his faults? &mdash; then is mortality
Exempt from imperfections?  was he not
A man &mdash; and such as thou wilt never see,
Land of my love!  to soothe and share thy lot?
Thou'st friends in spoken prayer and silent thought,
But where is HE &mdash; self exil'd and alone,
Who leaving home and kindred deeply fraught
With vengeance for thy sufferings, hath thrown
Those spell-words to the winds to live and die thine own?

Yet such were Byron's failings, they became
As light clouds floating by a summer sun,
All indistinct in the o'erwhelming flame
Of his unrivall'd glory. &mdash; But 'tis done&mdash;
The dim shore of eternity is won;
The rash and bigot censurer must be mute;
Be the prerogative assum'd by none&mdash;
HIM of the throne of life alone 'twill suit,
Whose mercy is his brightest &mdash; loftiest attribute!

Not that sepulchral mystery of soul
Which, thro' its darkness if, like lunar light
Thro' midnight storm, one flash of brightness stole,
Shadow'd that flash, and all again was night&mdash;
Not that alone made him to human sight
Seem more than mortal, but that god-like zeal
For liberty, which with intense delight
Within him burn'd, and which all men must feel
Who ever heard, shall hear the power of his appeal!

He touch'd the lyre &mdash; the music from its frame
Was freedom's essence, and its precepts made
Mankind familiar with each soaring name,
Whose deeds of freeborn-valour are pourtray'd,
In characters of light that cannot fade,
On Roman and Hellenic page. &mdash; We find
Beneath the British sceptre men who've laid
Their glory's base, but where is He to bind
Our spirits to his will &mdash; the wizard of the mind?

His soul is mid the mighty shades that came
With spell and pow'r and majesty upon
His earliest dreams and thoughts, till they became
His spirit's idols. &mdash; Sparta &mdash; Marathon&mdash;
Olympus &mdash; Ida &mdash; Athos, all which won
That soul from the low earth around it lie.
Alas for earth!  her intellectual sun,
Whose blaze appear'd too powerful to die,
Alas for earth!  hath pass'd &mdash; his greatness hath gone by.

Alas for Freedom!  and the glorious strife
Of those who would be free, and those who mourn'd
Over their country's bondage, loathing life
Held at a Tyrant's will. &mdash; The heart that burn'd
For universal freedom lies inurn'd,
Pulseless and cold; but his undying name
Ages shall consecrate, for we have learn'd
From him what mankind should be.  May his fame
O'er slavery's ruins run like Aetna's liquid flame!
