Save where you listen'd to the falling stream,
No murmur floated on the breeze of night;
O'er the wild heath the taper shed it's beam,
And cheer'd the trav'ller's long expecting sight.

At this lone hour, when contemplation's tears
Bedew the fate of sublunary joys;
Since the gay vision which our fancy rears,
Alas!  too soon the hand of death destroys.

Elgin forsook the pleasures of the hearth,
Where the glad peasants told their tale,
He fled the blessings of their social mirth,
No tale his sorrows sooth'd, his cares beguil'd.

Far from the hamlet, 'midst the barren moor,
An Abbey rear'd it's venerable state;
He wander'd lonely, mourning round it's tower,
And mus'd with sorrow on the works of fate.

The tear of frenzy glisten'd in his eyes,
Thus madd'ning, he in direful accents cried;
While from their tombs the startled ghosts arise,
And many a shade does through the twilight glide.

"Welcome, ye horrors, welcome to my soul!
Well do ye suit the sadness of my heart;
Totter, ye turrets, ye big thunders roll,
And round my head your vengeful fury dart.

"No more I wish for morning's blushing ray,
To chace the dreary terrors of the gloom;
No more the placid evening's twilight grey,
To shed it's fragrance o'er the rose's bloom.

"The sun that warm'd the prospect of my days,
That shone the blooming hope of future love;
Amidst the waves of time has quench'd it's rays,
ELFRIDA sleeps, and rests in realms above.

"Oft did we wander o'er the mountain's height,
And listen to the torrent's surge beneath:
Oft by the lunar stillness of the night,
We heard light forms step o'er the dusky heath.

"Since the sun's set, that smil'd upon our love,
Now let me hasten to the mountain's brow;
There from my grief a calm eternal prove,
By plunging thence into the waves below."

The altars shook, a dewy coldness spread,
O'er ev'ry saint around the ruin'd aisle;
Each pious bust did seem to shake it's head,
And hollow murmurs floated through the pile.

With hideous crash the trophied honours fell,
From off the moss-grown tomb, and shook the ground;
Hark!  from the tower, now tells the dismal bell,
And 'mid the silence flings it's hollow sound.

Amidst the ruins rose an armed shade,
Who grasp'd, with nerveless hand, the airy spear:
"Too soon of youth the beamy blossoms fade;
Too soon o'er friends we drop the sorrowing tear!

"Fond, wretched youth, he said, with cares unblest,
Why dost thou wake the slumbers of the dead?
Why break the sweet eternal bands of rest,
And rouse the spirit from his lowly bed?

"Despair now keeps her watch on some lone isle,
And forms the spell amidst the tiger's howl:
That on the poignard tempts the wretch to smile,
Or quaff with transport the death-yielding bowl.

"And such the spells that now thy senses bind,
That urge thy passions to the mountain's brow;
Forbear, fond youth, and give them to the wind,
No calm awaits amongst the waves below.

"Mark, in yon tomb, where glows a livid light,
Where ivy mantles the dark mould'ring fell;
Reclines a youth, who 'mongst these realms of night,
By fancy led, would oft his sorrows tell.

"Alas!  he lov'd ALMINA'S transient charms,
Bright as the dew-drop on the rose's pride;
But ere he clasp'd her in his circling arms,
Death shook the rose, &mdash; the dew-drop fell, &mdash; she died.

"Thro' the stain'd glass, while CYNTHIA pour'd her rays,
One night he roam'd, his brow with poppies wreath'd;
Whilst with full choir the angels hymn'd their lays,
And ev'ry sound a sacred horror breath'd.

"With thought oppress'd, ALMINA'S shade he call'd,
While weeping at her tomb he listless laid;
For love, embitter'd love, his soul enthrall'd,
Presumptuous youth, in death he sought the maid!

"The poignard chac'd the sorrow of his breast,
Love gave the pang, 'twas love that gave the wound;
He sunk to night eternal, not to rest,
Who left, uncall'd, life's busy destin'd round.

"By Heaven's decree, his restless sp'rit is bound
To pass in plaints the night, in flames the day;
Till three times nine, the sun has circled round,
And all his crimes, his sins are done away.

"And such thy fate, such doom awaits the deed,
Should'st thou the voice of Heav'n in me despise;
Forsake the brightness of an heav'nly meed,
And for a moment's grief wilt loose the prize!"

The heav'nly spirit then dissolv'd in air,
The youth was sway'd, obeys the will divine;
The sacred sounds still tremble in his ear,
With fault'ring steps he bends before the shrine.

Parent of all, he cry'd, thy will be done!
No more I'll weep, no more I'll tempt my doom;
But with contentment view each rising sun,
Till age shall stretch me in ELFRIDA'S tomb.

The light of morning smil'd upon the wave,
The youth retiring, sought the peaceful grove;
There to his God the grateful tribute gave,
And piety now claims the ties of love.
