Bright are the sky and earth, but more the deep
And silent lake, that looks, beneath the ray,
As doth a lovely woman in her sleep,
When golden thoughts of past existence play
Along her tranquil features.  Far away
Brighten the white walls of the dreaming town&mdash;
The monarch hill that shades the distant bay,
Hath bound his rough brows with a beamy crown,
And round his ebon throne the savage forests frown.

Hark!  by the echoing shore awakes a tone
A joyous tone which every heart can wake,
Within whose empire Love hath made a throne
Which storms have fail'd to shadow or to shake:
But when shall I again, by hill or lake&mdash;
Yes when, O God!  when will the songless string
Of this lorn heart forgettingly forsake
Its silence and its solitude, and sing
The tones of love it breath'd in the soul's leafy spring?

Oh never, never more!  it is not now,
The gift of time or kingdoms to restore
The young enchantress, whose marmoreal brow
The waving wealth of golden ringlets bore,
That often droop'd their silky curtain o'er
My slumbers pillow'd on her beating breast,
And her sweet voice to which my spirit's core
Sung as the wind-harp to the bidding West&mdash;
No, never more shall I be thus divinely blest!

What now are earth and beauty's witchery&mdash;
Am I not lost and desolate and lone&mdash;
The living forms whom I around me see
I may not mingle with: &mdash; a gulf is thrown
Between me and my fellows; and my moan
Must die along the friendless void, for she
Who bound my spirit to the earth hath flown
Beyond the stars, leaving but memory,
The wide world and the life which is not life &mdash; to me.

Yet peace is not of her celestial rest,
If to look down upon this earth, and hear
The Samiel-anguish of the desert breast
Whose love had been her life &mdash; her Eden here,
Be granted in that Seraph-peopled sphere!
Oh Thyrza!  Thyrza!  are the moments o'er
When from the moonlight valley to thy ear&mdash;
Thy listening ear the vassal breezes bore
Such sounds as these that come along the echoing shore?

Oh Thyrza!  Thyrza!  shall I never be
Enfranchised from this dark, terrestrial hell&mdash;
Shall not my fever'd spirit ever see
The home of life and light where thou dost dwell&mdash;
My only wish'd for heav'n! &mdash; but, to!  the swell
Of the awaking ocean, by the grey
Birth-light of morn is faintly ting'd &mdash; farewell,
Sweet hour of pensive thought!  I must away
To endure the curse that chains my spirit down to clay.
