As yet a blank unsully'd dost thou lie,
Not fairer looks the face of snow-crown'd mount,
Or housewife's linen, on the rural hedge
Oft pendent, bleaching in the sun, seen chief
When summer skies invite.  Alas!  who knows
Thy fate's incertainty?  What eye can pierce
The cloudy veil that intercepts thy doom?
Perhaps with orders mercantile replete
Thy fluctuating voy'ge thou mayst extend
Advent'rous, on the waves proud summit sail,
And reach the farthest Ina:  Or to the hand
Of widow rich, or blushing virgin, bear
Love's soft commission.  Raptur'd at the sight
Methinks to thine she joins her eager lips,
Sweet as twin rose-buds in Aurora's dew
Coelestially embalm'd, and stores thee safe
Betwixt her pleasure-swelling hills of joy,
With smiling Nature's azure pencil streak'd.
Ah!  could I thus, like thee, my head recline
In am'rous languishment, and taste entranc'd
The circumambient bliss!  How would I kiss,
And revel on the strawb'ry centre!  Happy thought!
By all the pow'r of ardent love, I glow,
With fierce desire I glow &mdash; Keep down, my heart,
Nor let thy master wander from his theme.
Perchance the sage in praeterperfect lore
Deep read, the rites of nations may deduce
Link'd in the chain of time, and on thy leaf
Historic truth inscribe.  Or, woe to thought!
Thy lily-looking face may be impress'd
With letters dark, and words of sound uncouth
Yclep'd a Sheriff's warrant.  Arm'd with this
The Bailiff sallies forth with branch of oak
Tremendous, and behind him cringing close
Catchpole with tiger eye, and ghastly front
With many a scar indented, horrid pair!
By wretch insolvent hated.  Or perhaps
A kinder fate awaits thee, doom'd to bear
The gentle pressure of Melinda's finger,
As to thy page the secrets of her soul
Th' ecstatic Nymph imports, or sends thee forth
In billet doux dissected round the town.
But oh!  prophetic thought!  conjecture sad!
Methinks I see thee underneath the hand
Of daring bard.  Full fraught with Poetry,
Or something similar, he deems thee choice,
Fit food for Lloyd's, or monthly Magazine.
And, tho' true merit dwell in thy contents,
Full oft it meets with treatment base, pass'd o'er
By Printer injudicious, and consign'd
To use obscene, unworthy; which, if nam'd
Would call a blush into the Muse's cheek,
And flood the Poet's eye with angry tears.
Or, if this accident thou shouldst survive,
Disgrace attends thee still, obscure on shelf,
On shelf of dust reclining, 'midst a heap
Of literary rubbish, 'till a Slave
Of money-loving soul to Pastry-cook,
Or petty Chandler sell thee.  Thence in tarts
To dirty hand of School-boy may'st thou come,
Or sweat in grease of candle, or enwrap
Salt butter's quartern.  Then when sluttish nymph
Has shew'd thee ev'ry Corner of her garret,
And with her hands oft dabb'd thee, chang'd thy hue
To dye abhorr'd, and squalid as her own,
She leaves thee hissing in a small-coal grate
'Till all thy sheet evaporate in flame.
But to pursue thee sailing down the tide
Of mystic chance, my little bark departs.
Here then I moor, and give thee to the sport
Of winds, whilst I in perilous attempts
Less daring, court the safety of the shore.
