Lo!  yonder airy eminence so high,
That proudly towers above the fertile vale,
Whose lofty scite command the distant hills,
And braves the keenness of the northern gale.

There, &mdash; (if tradition's voice no erring tale
Wast in the rumour of deceiving years,)&mdash;
Dire superstition's dedicating hand
Enrich'd a house of penitential tears.

Perhaps, &mdash; while musing over thoughts like these,&mdash;
I view the very tower, whose tinkling bell
Call'd for the beaded roll of early prayers,
Full lowly said, &mdash; like many a mutter'd spell.

Here, 'mid the cloister's strict immuring walls,
To speed the dull pace of the tedious hour,
The pious vot'ries o'er the spotless gauze
Urg'd the slow needle's imitative power.

Urg'd it to many a sweetly-fancied scene,
Which admiration scan'd with curious eye,
And to the pompous vestiture of courts
With ready skill transmitted rich supply.

And often here repentant frailty kneel'd,
Whose peace inconstant man had rudely broke,
And, as her hand inflicting penance rear'd,
Soft-ey'd contrition wept beneath the stroke.

Here, o'er the icy pavement, shivering chill,
The meek enthusiast crept with naked feet,
Chaunted the solemn requiem's sad'ning strain,
And gave a sister's corse a last retreat.

Then, &mdash; to her lonely cell in horror stol'n,
Celestial dreams emparadise her rest,
Her parted friend with glory ray'd, she sees
Within the sacred mansions of the blest.

Beckoning she sees her, &mdash; and with ravish'd ear
She hears, or thinks she hears, the angel say,
"Not long my sister shalt thou suffer there,
But speedy burst thy prison-house of clay,

"And every joy to tenfold bliss refin'd,
And every tear for ever wip'd away,
In glitt'ring circle with yon seraph band
Lave in the fountain of eternal day."

Ye holy victims of mistaking zeal,
Of rash resolve, or of parental pride,
Whose virgin love, whose fond maternal cares
Devotion-struck in dull seclusion died,

I pay your hapless doom one pensive tear,
As thus I trace it in my artless rhimes;
Then, with redoubled joy, I spring to hail
Reason's bright ray, that beams on happier times.
