Pierian nymphs that haunt Sicilian plains,
And first inspir'd to sing in rural strains;
Vouchsafe to teach my trembling reed to play,
And woods to join in concert with my lay.
Our Indian woods, as yet unus'd to sing,
When taught by you, with harmony shall ring.
O waft your way from fam'd Parnassus' height
(The muses love a bold adventrous flight)
And westward steer &mdash; Phoebus will lead the way,
You'll reach our mountains e'er the close of day;
And there behold, what sure must highly please,
Apollo's steeds plunge in the western seas.
Soon as the ocean hides his sacred head,
You'll see the golden curtains of his bed:
And waiting Hesper gather in the day,
Whilst Cynthia spreads her silent ray.

A western course has pleas'd you all along;
Greece, Rome, and Briton, flourish all in song.
Keep on your way, and spread a glorious fame,
Around the earth let all admire your name.
Chuse in our plains or forests soft retreats;
For here the muses boast no antient seats.
Here fertile fields, and fishy streams abound,
Nothing is wanting but Poetic ground.
Bring me that pipe with which Alexis charm'd
The Eastern world, and every bosom warm'd.
Our Western climes shall henceforth own your power;
Thetis shall hear it from her watry bower;
Even Phoebus listen as his chariot flies,
And smile propitious from his flaming skies.

Haste lovely nymphs, and quickly come away,
Our sylvan gods lament your long delay;
The stately oaks that dwell on Delaware
Rear their tall heads to view you from afar.
The Naids summon all their scaly crew
And at Henlopen anxious wait for you.

Haste lovely nymphs and quickly reach our shore;
Th' impatient river heeds his tides no more,
Forsakes his banks, and where he joins the main,
Heaps waves on waves to usher in your train.
A numerous fleet, rich with what Ceres yields
(Ceres the goddess of our fertile fields)
With ensigns waving in the pros'prous gale
For want of water scarce can bend a sail;
The goddess vows to stop her liberal hand&mdash;
Haste lovely nymphs, and save a sinking land.
Harmonious Nine, bring harmony and peace,
Unite our hearts, and bid all discord cease.

But hark they come! &mdash; The Dryads crowd the shore,
The waters rise, I hear the billows roar!
Hoarse Delaware the joyful tidings brings,
And all his swans, transported, clap their wings.
Our mountains ring with all their savage host&mdash;
Thrice-welcome lovely nymphs, to India's coast.
Not more parnassian rocks Phoebus admire;
Nor Thracian mountains Orpheus' tuneful lyre;
Not more sad lovers court the darkling note
Of Philomela's mournful warbling throat;
Not more the morning lark delights the swains,
Than you sweet maids our Pennsylvanian plains!

Britain's fair offspring, nymphs as angels bright,
In silent rapture, wonder at the sight.
The swarthy race their wampum belts prepare,
And loud YOHAWS shout thro' the trembling air.
What do I see? &mdash; From heaven a sudden blaze!
The Indian crowds are hush'd in deep amaze!
Stare on each other with attentive eyes,
For wisdom thirst, and their rude state despise!
They call to Onas:  generous Onas hears,
His heart is melted with barbarian tears.
What mean these wonders, say, divinely sprung!
The virgins smil'd, and thus melodious sung&mdash;

"O mortals blind to gracious heaven's decree,
Why thus astonish'd at the change you see?
Look back thro' ages past, you'll find it clear,
The rude are polish'd, soon as we appear.
Or if barbarian rage must have its time,
We seek abodes in some more peaceful clime.
Thus when the north pour'd forth its Gothic swarms,
From lov'd Ausonia vanish'd all our charms,
To visit Europe's crimson fields no more,
Until the general massacre was o'er;
At length on fair Britannia cast a smile,
And rais'd a Chaucer in the fav'rite isle.
Successive bards, in one continued line,
Form'd the brave English from a Saxon Mine.
'Tis ours, by gentle means, to tame the heart;
'Tis yours, to sing whatever we impart.
Onas shall favour, whose extensive mind,
Loves not a part, but all the human kind."

They sung and vanish'd, whilst I gaz'd in vain;
Yet gently whisper'd, still sing on my swain.
Lend then, Melpomene, your sacred fire,
And verses fit for THOMAS' ear, inspire.

O thou distinguish'd by a far-spread fame,
Obtain'd by merit, not thy honour'd name;
Whether you strive, by strong perswasive sense,
To urge a naked province to defence,
Or wisely dreading savage Indian foes,
By friendship's chain avert tremendous woes;
Hear and accept my harmless rural lay;
So may you hold a long and happy sway.
'Tis not a venal minion fawning sues,
But one who scorns to prostitute his muse.

'Twas in the season of high vernal floods,
When kindly Zephyrs chear'd the swelling buds;
Thro' low-land meadows, herds and flocks were seen,
The morning sun, with horizontal beams,
Darts thro' the trees, scarce glittering on the streams.
Two careful shepherds walk the river side,
To watch the dangers of the flowing tide.
Struck with surprize and grief, upon an oak
Palaemon musing lean'd, when Moeris spoke&mdash;

MOERIS.
What means Palaemon, idly loit'ring here,
When only now I sav'd your drowning steer.
Your meadows float, I saw two weathers more,
Struggling thro' mire, and hardly reach the shore.

PALAEMON.
Thanks to my neighbour for his generous care;
To find me so neglectful is but rare.
But news distressing gave me such a shock,
I quite forgot my herd and tender flock.

MOERIS.
Alas my friend!  from whence that trickling tear?
I dread to ask &mdash; and yet I long to hear.
Too well I know, 'tis some uncommon cause,
That from a manly breast such sorrow draws.
Speak then Palaemon, ease an anxious heart,
That throbs for you, and fain wou'd bear a part.

PALAEMON.
'Tis not a private loss afflicts my soul,
A part we both may bear, but not the whole.
For nations weep, and with one voice deplore
The musical Alexis now no more!
From England's coast, see yonder distant sail;
But now it pass'd, swift as the flying gale;
They call'd aloud, and shun'd the list'ning shore,
Weep shepherds weep, Alexis is no more.

MOERIS.
Then art thou gone!  and with thee every art
To please, to check, to sooth, to rouse, the heart?
Who now shall charm the nymphs with heav'nly strains?
Or spread the flowers on Windsor's verdant plains?
Who sing thee Loddon, and thy weeping streams,
Thy shaded waters, cool as Cynthia's beams?
Go tell thy sorrows in thy parent's ears
And grateful Thames shall drown his banks with tears.
Sweet as their dying songs, his swans shall mourn;
And murmur grief each tributary urn.

Hang all your leaves, with brilliant drops, ye trees,
And shed them gently on the trav'ling breeze;
Ye moisten'd gales, fly swift to Cooper's hill,
That rocks may weep, and swell each purling rill.
Not Colin's self, in Rosalinda's praise,
E'er sung so sweet, so moving notes as these;
"Once I was skill'd in every herb that grew,
And every plant that drinks the morning dew:
Ah wretched shepherd, what avails thy art,
To cure thy lambs, and not to heal thy heart!"
What voice so sweet?  so smooth what numbers flow?
Who heard thee sigh, and did not feel thy woe?
The coldest nymph in time might prove more kind;
But fruitless groans we give unto the wind.
She might relent, but who shall thee restore?
Weep shepherds weep &mdash; Alexis is no more!

PALAEMON.
So wails the turtle dove his slaughter'd mate,
High-perch'd in air, from his celestial seat;
The neigh'bring rocks re-echo the sad sound,
And general sorrow spreads itself around.
Lamented swain!  mourn'd in such lays as those,
Sweet shall you sleep, and soft your bones repose.
O happy Moeris!  Yours shall be the bays,
And next Alexis shine in future praise.
Yet let me try, tho' meaner prove my lay,
To the lov'd swain my last respects to pay.
Ye muses aid, and great Apollo hear,
No name was e'er more grateful to your ear.

MOERIS.
Not cooling zephyrs to the reaping swain;
Not to the sun-parch'd meadows, kindly rain;
Nor vernal Phoebus to the warbling throng,
Can yield such comfort as to me that song.

PALAEMON.
Why shou'd we longer doubt celestial signs?
Ah mortals blind to powerful heaven's designs!
Nor did the flaming comet aught avail;
In vain it blaz'd, and shook its horrid tail.
The threat'ning omen travers'd round our skies,
Whilst we, dull wretches, shut our heedless eyes.
Ask what it means, of those for learning fam'd,
Straight the poor shepherd's ignorance is blam'd.
Dark is their knowledge; all their glasses blind;
Now to our grief the dire presage we find.
Did it excite your envy, heavenly powers,
That so much worth and harmony were ours?
Or was our world too little to admire,
One that wou'd shine amidst your glorious quire?
But now me thinks I hear the nine rejoice,
And hail him welcome with a general voice.
Immortal bards, an awful laurel'd throng;
Rise from the seats, salute him with a song.
The Reverend Greek, presiding o'er the rest,
Grateful embraces for his favours past;
Confessing justice done to every page.
The Mantuan crys "The glory of his age!
While plants their shade, or flowers their odours give,
His name, his honour, and his praise shall live."

MOERIS.
Well hast thou sung, O Bard, divinely fir'd,
You sing as if Alexis self inspir'd.
Those heavenly strains revive my soul no less
Than balmy sleep the weary, on the grass:
Or than the thirsty trav'ler, cooling streams,
When sultry Phoebus plays his scorching beams.
Yet shou'd your song like Orpheus' music sound,
Which made beasts, trees and monuments dance around;
Death wou'd not hear, nor wou'd the grave relent:
With heaven's decrees let mortals be content.

PALAEMON.
Here then we rest, and this alternate verse,
With well tun'd pipes, at noon we will rehearse,
To sooth our grief; then for the task prepare;
But now the herd and flock demand our care.

Thus sung the shepherds as the muse inspir'd,
The river listen'd, and its floods retir'd.
