'Twas when the sun had from the skies withdrawn,
With softer light the moon resplendent shone;
Thro' the tall forest's close embow'ring height,
Her gliding crescent shed uncertain light,
While pensive William held his dubious way,
Alone, conducted by her flitting ray;
Swift thro' the trees the hast'ning shepherd hy'd,
To meet his love, his long-intended bride.
Full forty furlongs o'er his heathy moor
The swain must travel ere he reach her door;
That length of journey still did William find,
When he had left the gloomy wood behind.

Now vap'ry clouds obscur'd the silver moon,
Which thro' the floating veil but faintly shone;
And now quick trav'ling o'er the dreary waste,
The swain enamour'd half his toil had past,
When lo!  an envious meteor's errant light
Deceitful shines, and cheats his eager sight.
"Yonder's the cottage," to himself he cries,
Where Mary's charms shall greet my longing eyes;
There shall my toil a blissful solace find,
In talk with her, so pleasing and so kind.
Lovely she is, so witty and so gay;
With her how swift the moments steal away!
So sweet she looks, whate'er she does or says,
I could for ever hear, for ever gaze!
Care-worn, no more with wakeful love I'll pine,
When spring returns, I'll make the charmer mine.
I cannot think she would my proffer slight;
She surely would not, if I judge aright.
As once I urg'd my suit, and warmly prest,
('Twas when reclining on her heaving breast)
I told her, would she but consent to join
The hand I held in marriage bond with mine,
No peasant low, nor splendid prince so high,
Could taste such joys, or be so blest as I;
She blush'd, and silent drew her hand away;
She said not yes &mdash; but yet she said not nay.
Her blushing cheek, her speaking eye, confest
That I, at least, her kind esteem possest.
So sweet she looks, whate'er she does or says,
I could for ever hear, for ever gaze!
O!  when she's mine, then with the lark I'll rise,
Soon as the sun-beams paint the eastern skies;
To fetch the kine I'll cross the dewy plain,
Assist to milk, and drive to field again:
When summer comes we'll toil the live-long day;
I'll sow the grass, and she shall make the hay:
When harvest waves mature along the field,
Together we'll our crooked sickles wield:
Pleas'd will we lay the weighty sheaves along,
And soothe our labour with a sprightly song.
How gaily should I ply the whistling flail,
To thresh that corn she'd winnow in the gale;
While loaves or cakes, prepar'd by hand so neat,
To me would taste with relish doubly sweet.
So sweet she looks, whate'er she does or says,
I could for ever hear, for ever gaze!"

With strains like these the swain beguil'd his care,
Of fraud mistrustless, or not well aware;
And as the rude spontaneous numbers flow'd,
The quick succession cheats the tedious road:
Heedless he runs to gain the faithless light,
Nor aught suspects, or weens himself not right.
He fondly hoping soon the cot to gain,
Misguided wanders o'er the trackless plain.
At length, when long he'd roam'd the wide-spread waste,
And far beyond the wish'd-for cottage past,
Sudden from sight the sportive flame withdrew!
He stopt amaz'd, and wist not what to do;
Then strait emerging shone a radiant beam,
And, trembling, quiver'd on a purling stream
That cross'd his path &mdash; confounded stood the swain,
And sunk exhausted on the heathy plain.
No purling stream had cross'd his path before,
Nor could he guess what ground he'd travell'd o'er;
Yet stung with rage, impatient of delay,
He rose, and backward trod his devious way.
Here fortune prov'd to wilder'd William kind,
(Dame Fortune's acts are ever vague and blind)
She led his steps thro' bogs and bushy dells,
Straight to the cottage where his Mary dwells.
She waiting sat, (nor reck'd the midnight hour)
For William's promis'd coming o'er the moor,
The wearied swain his sad mischance relates,
His toilsome wand'rings, and vexatious straits:
She laugh'd to hear, then gave a tender smile;
Glad William saw, nor rued his former toil.
