Of noisy rattling Drums and clattering Shields,
Of roaring Cannon and the Din of War,
In hoarse rough Cadence, pleas'd while others sing,
My Muse in peaceful Solitude delights,
And with the Instruments of social Life
Adorns her Song.  She neither wades through Seas
Of Blood, nor furious treads o'er Hills of Slain;
Ah murderous human Race!  Blood she abhors,
Save what the Lancet or the Razor keen
Salubrious draw from Mortal Vein or Head,
When Pain or Sickness horrid deep disturb
The Chrystal Springs of Life.&mdash;

She first the Razor sings, best Instrument!
Whose tender Touch conveys the Seeds of Health,
And gives luxuriant Vigour to the Mind.

See the keen Edge of bright cerulean Hue!
How smoothly polish'd, glittering in the Sun!
The gentlest Touch, by skilfull Tonsor giv'n,
Dispells from mortal Brain the noxious Fumes
That oft the shining Genius puzzling vex.

So Boreas, God of Northern blustring Climes,
With Cheeks extended, puff'd with keenest Air,
(When all the Atmosphere with Vapours crude
Is fill'd, and Life hangs on a Spider's Thread)
Blows out the healthy Gale, and scatters wide
The instructive Vapour; all at once the Joy
Diffusive spreads, and to the Heart and Face
Conveys the Pleasure panted for before.

Happy New-England!  Happy Climate Hail!
The salutiferous Air replenishes
The Springs of Life:   To thee from India's Shores
Far distant, hastning, Crowds unnumber'd come
Of human Race, with Visage wan and pale;
Their Shadows lengthning with an Ev'ning Sun;
Their very Souls exhal'd with torrid Beams,
Or choak'd with stagnant Air; to thee they come,
Thy Aid is freely lent, their Noon returns,
The Fountain swells and overflows with Life.

Blest salutary Engine!  Whose Approach
Clears up the Mists and Errors of old Night.
The Sciences profound and every Art
For Ages in Obscurity lay hid
And deep involv'd; 'till thy kind Influence,
And penetrative Edge dispell'd the Gloom,
And all to full perfective Knowledge brought.

Thou Ghost of Epicurus!  Rise and say,
What has your mad Philosophy avail'd?
Can floating Atoms jumble into Worlds
Without the Guidance of a Hand supreme?
Had you the Razor's kind Assistance felt,
The thick'ned Fog with Speed had drove away,
The Rays had shone, and you the GOD confest.

Commerce and Trade whose Bands of civil Life
Envelop'd lay in Darkness wild Abyss,
'Till thou the Veil of Ignorance cast off:
Then Arts and Worlds at once burst into Day.

Thou kind Physician, Curer of all Ills!
When pensive Melancholy brooding sets
Heavy on human Brow:  One Glance of thee
Far off the Horror scatters, and restores
The Sprightliness and Gaiety of Life,
And Relish gives to all on Earth call'd good.

The Madman too when crown'd with Wreaths of Straw,
And Diadems and Scepters in his Hand,
With Royalty regaling his big Soul,
Then rack'd with some imaginary Loss,
And with his Groans melting the tender Heart;
And thus alternate toss'd 'twixt Grief and Joy:
By thy kind Aid, Reason resumes her Seat
And sovereign reigns:  'till thou again withdraw'st,
And then the wild unhappy Wretch returns.

Even the stupid muddy-headed Sot
O'ercome with Flips intoxicating Steams,
(Liquor abhor'd by Gods and only lov'd
By Men of Taste deprav'd) this stupid Sot
When low depress'd with the last Night's Debauch,
And plagued with leaky Eyes and faultring Tongue;
The Fumes by thee exhal'd, his Senses strait
Return, and Flips intoxicating Reign is ceas'd.

The powder'd Beau with Gallantry inspir'd,
Struck with the Charm's of Caelia's beauteous Face,
All o'er immerg'd in Love; for thee he calls,
Thy kind Assistance giv'n, with Haste he hies
Smirking and gay; down at her Feet he falls,
Adores the Goddess and with Rapture dies.

The jolly Sailor too when quite fatigued
With India's six Months Voyage long and hard,
Ploughing through Neptune's stormy rough Domain;
He treads the long'd-for Shore, with shaggy Beard,
Horrid like Tyger in Pursuit of Prey;
At Distance safe the gaping Boys keep off,
Gazing astonish'd, dreading near Approach,
Lest vex'd he takes them in his dreadful Maw:
But when he worships at thy Shrine devout
The Beast is then transform'd into the Man.

But above all thou grand Catholicon!
Or by what useful Name soe'er thou'rt call'd!
Thou sweet Composer of the tortur'd Mind!
When all the Wheels of Life are heavy clogg'd,
With Cares or Pain, and nought but Horror dire
Before us stalks with dreadful Majesty,
Embitt'ring all the Pleasures we enjoy;
To thee distress'd we call; thy gentle Touch
Consigns to balmy Sleep our troubled Breasts.
