Come, my Philander, seek the peaceful plain,
Leave the dull town where noise and tumult reign;
Come, taste the pleasures that the country yields
In rural sports and sweetly smiling fields;
Now winter with his dreary dismal train,
Bleak winds, and frozen lakes, and chilling rain,
And snow is gone; and in his place succeeds,
Young smiling spring that gaily cloaths the meads.
The earth refresh'd by warm prolific show'rs,
From forth her bounteous lap profusely pours
A bright, a gay, variety of flow'rs.
A fragrant gale is wafted by the breeze,
And smiling green adorns the fields and trees.
On ev'ry spray, on every hawthorn bush,
Now chaunt the warbling Linnet and the Thrush,
The sportive lambkins in the meadows play,
And frisk and gladden in the sun's warm ray.

Come, view the rural lass, whose looks proclaim,
Sweet innocence of soul, an healthy frame;
Polly, the loveliest nymph of all the train,
That join in rural dance upon the plain,
Shines with the greatest grace; in her we see,
A modest look, a sweet simplicity,
Such rosy blushes her fair cheeks adorn,
As streak the sky at the first peep of morn;
Her ruby lips as red as cherries are,
White as a curd her even teeth appear;
A lovely shape!  "Her bodice aptly lac'd,
From her full bosom to her slender waste,
An air and harmony of shape express,
Fine by degrees, and beautifully less."
Whether a-nigh the rush-fring'd brook she spreads,
The new mown hay, amidst the level meads,
Or draws delicious milk from lowing herds,
Or into cheese with art she press the curds;
Or the smooth cream confin'd within her churn
Into rich butter dex'trously she turn,
Still she excels; for her the shepherds sigh,
And leave all other nymphs when she is by.
Yet sigh in vain; for Damon in her soul,
Young happy Damon reigns without controul,
The comeliest shepherd of the village he,
The loveliest maiden of the hamlet she.

Come, hail with me, my friend, the rising day,
Leave your dull bed, where long in town you lay,
'Till the sun shone with his meridian ray.
You know not what the pleasure is I feel,
To see the saffron morn peep o'er yon hill;
To taste its fragrant breath; to see around,
A thousand opening flow'rs bestrew the ground;
To hear the little songsters ope their throats,
And sing th' almighty's praise in various notes.

Haste then, my friend, and with me here enjoy,
Such heart-felt pleasures as can never cloy;
Pleasures that leave no piercing sting behind,
But even in rememb'rance chear the mind.
