THYRSIS.
Here gentle Damon, midst this vernal scene,
Fit haunt for gods, or beauty's lovely queen,
Beneath embow'ring arches let us sing,
A grateful lay to the returning Spring.

DAMON.
Hail, happy scenes!  my grateful breast inspire!
And fan, ye gentle gales, the kindling fire!
&mdash;But lo!  Clarinda passes thro' the grove:
The smiling charmer tunes my soul to love.
At her approach what tender thoughts arise,
How my heart beats and flutters with surprise,
Aw'd, and yet chear'd by her resistless eyes!
Leave me my fair one's blooming charms to sing,
And thou shalt chaunt the beauties of the Spring.

THYRSIS.
Clarinda's worth is known to ev'ry swain,
The public pleasure, and the public pain,
At once the grief and triumph of the plain!
I, void of passion, praise thy fav'rite fair,
Confess her lovely form, and graceful air.
But lest in me thou shouldst a rival fear
I'll be content from thee her praise to hear.

Spring be my theme.  See!  chearful Spring returns,
And drooping nature now no longer mourns:
No more her robes of hoary snow she wears,
Nor clad with ice, and spangled frost appears:
No more the shudd'ring flocks for shelter fly,
Nor shepherds view aghast the low'ring sky.

Behold, blest change!  the bury'd flow'rs revive,
And all the glad creation seems to live;
Refreshing gales their balmy fragrance shed,
And waking nature rises from the dead.
The thick'ning groves their waving green resume,
Fresh opening blossoms breathe a rich perfume,
Whilst kindly show'rs their vital pow'r diffuse,
And teeming earth imbibes the copious dews.

The busy birds their pleasing task pursue,
And with glad voice their lively notes renew:
Hark!  what shrill concerts echo thro' the grove!
How sweet the little warblers carol love!

Our fleecy flocks in flow'ry pastures feed,
And kids, luxuriant, wanton in the mead;
There frisk the tender lambs, (our present care)
Those sportive emblems of the youthful year.
Bounding with joy the flowing hours they pass,
And crop the fragrant thyme and springing grass,
Till, courted by the sun's declining ray,
Upon the river's bank they careless stray.
See!  near advancing, with delightful eye,
Their dancing image in the stream they spy;
Narcissus like, the mimic form admire,
Now fondly peep, now wantonly retire.

The season's warmth tempts Faunus from the wood,
To court the pleasures of the cooling flood;
Th' affrighted nymphs his rude embraces shun,
And from his arms in wild disorder run.
Of his approach the slumb'ring Naiads dream,
Forsake the banks, and rush into the stream.

DAMON.
There, Thyrsis, there, how oft Clarinda rides,
In her light bark, along the chrystal tides!
The conscious groves her awful from adore,
And bending willows languish on the shore.
O'er the smooth surface swift she glides along,
While swains enchanted listen to her song:
Mild fanning zephyrs on her bosom play,
And fondly steal the dying sounds away;
Too soon, alas!  far wafted they retire,
Borne on the winds, and tunefully expire.
The short liv'd stream admiring shepherds mourn,
Gaze on the shore, and wait her wish'd return;
With longing eyes the less'ning bark pursue,
Bless the lov'd fair, and murm'ring sigh &mdash; Adieu!

THYRSIS.
Damon, we'll all our faculties employ
In jovial mirth, and give a loose to joy,
Since Spring and Beauty both conspire to move
Th' enamour'd soul to Poetry and Love.

DAMON.
These halcyon hours our purest transports claim,
Since dear Clarinda's the delightful theme;
Her powerful charms can e'en despair control,
And smile away the sorrows of my soul.
Her sparkling eyes soft flowing strains infuse,
And crown the pleasing labors of the muse.

Where e'er Clarinda graceful moves along,
The admiring crowd to gaze around her throng;
With low obedience all obsequious bow,
Whilst, unobserv'd, her jealous rivals glow;
In vain, when her superior charms are nigh,
Their soothing arts, inferior beauties try;
Her lovely mien attracts our wond'ring eyes,
And each beholder for Clarinda sighs.

Whene'er the shepherds and the nymphs advance,
To sprightly music, in the mazy dance,
How elegantly shines this matchless maid,
What nameless charms are by each step display'd!
Graceful, with easy majesty she moves,
While all around her wait the smiling Loves.

Mean while the virgins lilly hands prepare
Gay-blooming garlands for the conq'ring fair.
What rapt'rous bard her various praise can sing?
The spring crowns nature, but she crowns the spring.

From her kind arms I can no longer stay,
Methinks I hear her rally my delay;
Tho' friendship could detain, love summons me away.
Come let us leave this solitary shade,
And thro' the meadows seek th' inchanting maid.

THYRSIS.
We'll go, my friend &mdash; And see!  the day retires,
While vesper kindles up his nightly fires:
Thy sylvan choirs, rock'd by the rustling breeze,
Now cease their lays, and slumber in the trees;
Now, by the rising moon's mild streaming light,
Clarinda chears the shadowy face of night,
Where the gay virgins take their evening round,
Or in wide circles, trace the Fairy ground;
Thither will we with eager steps repair,
Mix in the circle, and surprise the fair.
There will I Damon's amorous strains rehearse;
Clarinda with a smile shall shall crown his verse.
