Night spread its shadowy mantle o'er the sky,
And day's bright beauties faded from the eye,
When Peter sought the stillness of the grove,
To vent his sighs, and woo his sable love,
There pour'd his plaint in Phyllis' listening ear,
And drew from her mild eye a pitying tear.

PETER.
Phyllis, thou long hast prov'd my faithful heart,
And known thy smiles alone can sooth the smart.
Ere the [blanch'd?] foe explor'd our native wild,
Robb'd our rich hoard, our peaceful dwelling spoil'd,
Or urg'd the cruel, mercenary chace,
Captur'd, or slew, our unresisting race;
Before arriv'd that sad, distracting time
When we were forc'd to quit our peaceful clime,
Thou didst my youthful, tender passion prove,
Which time has ripen'd into warmest love.

PHYLLIS.
Oft fancy on these earlier pleasures dwells;
Oft memory of thy generous kindness tells,
Looks back delighted to those scenes of ease
When warm sincerity taught love to please,
When, heirs to all by liberal nature given,
We shar'd the bliss, and knew no brighter heaven.
Think not, though all these chearing joys are fled,
That love which form'd their sweetest rapture dead.
Although denied the pleasures freedom gave,
And doom'd to toil a poor, emaciate slave,
Still my fond heart thy image shall enshrine,
Partake thy lot, and own no love but thine.

PETER.
Thy words speak comfort to my anxious breast,
Yet fail to calm its sorrows into rest.
For ah!  no other joy thy lover knows,
And scorns to make thee partner of his woes.
No hop'd reward his industry attends,
His toil no kind encouragement befriends;
Expos'd to all the hardships which await,
On abject servitude's laborious state.
Unceasing toil, a frowning master's ire,
The stern rebuke, or whip's chastisement dire,
The noon day heat, and night's unwholesome dew,
Be mine, but let them not devolve on you.

PHYLLIS.
With thee these many hardships I will share,
And unrepining all these sufferings bear;
I'll strive to cheer thy labours thro' the day,
Lessen thy pain, and charm thy cares away.

PETER.
Thou plead'st in vain.  On noblest purpose bent,
My free born soul conceives a bold intent.
Thou know'st that when this toilsome life is o'er
Oppression's rod shall tyrannize no more,
But then, for so our country's God ordain,
To our own home we shall return again:
And there, through time's interminable space,
Free from alloy the richest pleasures taste.
Soon may these joys be our's!  Why then endure
Life's numerous ills, since heaven presents a cure,
He said.  They sought the river's steepest side,
Leap'd from its bank, and sunk beneath the tide.
