On Alpine hills, whence sable Ister pours
Its rising billows thro' the sylvan shores;
Blest Lycidas, the mountain woods along,
Drove his fair flock, and tun'd the rural song;
The sun's declining wheels had ting'd the main,
And from their toils return'd the labouring train,
When from the vales a hoary swain he view'd,
With feeble pace, approaching thro' the wood:
His right a staff of bending willow bore,
His left sustain'd a scrip of scanty store:
Thrice twenty winters press'd him with their cold,
Thrice twenty summers had his sorrows told.
His tatter'd mantle floated in the breeze,
A faithful dog pursued him thro' the trees.
Soon as advanc'd the venerable man,
Awhile he stood, and gazed, and thus began.

ALCANDER.
"Thrice happy swain!  who far from ills remov'd,
By heaven protected, by the world belov'd,
Liv'st here, the monarch of this blest domain,
While desolation fills the neighbouring plain:
For thee the skies indulgent showers bestow;
For thee the fields in bright profusion grow.
At eve, secure thy fleecy care retires;
At eve the hearth displays its cheerful fires:
In peace thy vales and sunny hills are sown;
Such are thy joys, and such were once my own.
But now my soul these pleasures must resign,
My flock, my cot, and all that once were mine;
Doom'd thro' a world of misery to stray,
And find no home in life's declining day.
This dog alone, of all my former friends,
Cheers my sad hours, and now my steps attends;
And whereso'er thro' lingering life I go,
With dumb compassion mitigates my woe.
Oh!  let thy hospitable gifts be given,
The friend of strangers is the care of heav'n."

LYCIDAS.
"O swain!  whate'er my fields or lowing kine
Can yield to want and age shall here be thine;
Not solely for themselves the good should live,
'Tis heav'n that grants them wealth, and theirs to give.
But whence, O stranger!  this reverse of fate,
Thy steps so wearied, and thy journey so late?
Has some unfriendly brother, from thy land,
Or Lord, expell'd thee with a tyrant's hand?
Or son usurp'd, ungrateful on the plain,
Thy rural mansion and thy fleecy train?"

ALCANDER.
"No lordly tyrant with unfeeling rage,
O swain!  expels me in declining age;
Nor brother, base, usurps my fleecy train;
Nor neighbour drives me friendless from the plain;
Nor son ungrateful &mdash; but by strangers thrown
On the wide world, and to the world unknown:
I taste the bread of bitterness and care,
And feel the dire inclemencies of air:
For now no flock, nor cottage, mine remain,
Nor friends in age, my sorrows to restrain.
Thrice fifty sheep, and thrice a score of kine,
Spread o'er the fields and mountain ground were mine:
Before my cot the Rhone impell'd his flood,
Behind arose, of beech, a lofty wood;
There first my happier scenes of life begun,
In valleys shaded from the summer's sun.
Along the craggy cliffs my vines arose,
With purple clusters and depending boughs:
There shone above the steep my fields of corn,
With safe enclosures from the forest borne;
There first the sweets of early toil I knew,
There oft my feet have brush'd the morning dew;
There, too, my flocks along the valleys spread,
Paus'd at the brook, or sought the cooling shade;
While I, rejoicing on my rural throne,
Beheld, at ease, the little realm my own.
But ah!  not long, the rage of wasting war
Destroy'd my fields, and urg'd me thence afar.
Now, driv'n to want, in solitude I go,
Thro' sylvan shades, and mountains topt with snow,
To beg subsistence from the rural train,
And sooth, with hope of death, the sense of pain.
This path-way led my feet from yonder height,
To seek repose, and shelter from the night:
Oh!  let the hospitable boon be given;
Who gives the stranger will receive from heaven."

LYCIDAS.
"Hard is the bosom that rejects the poor,
And sad to shut the stranger from the door:
This night, at least, with me forget your woes,
Rest from your toils, and in my cot repose:
For now the night extends her awful shade,
And clouds of darkness from the mountain spread;
Along the vale each weary swain retires,
And distant domes reflect their evening fires."
