Hail, lovely harbinger of spring,
Sweet herald of the blooming May,
O!  how I'm charm'd to hear thee sing,
Dear songster of the flow'ry spray;
Nature enraptur'd hears thy voice,
The groves are charm'd, the smiling vales rejoice.

Thine is the season of delight,
Thy notes revive the wak'ning flow'rs,
Thy ever charming songs invite,
Ere May leads on the smiling hours;
Joy ne'er salutes the youthful year,
Till in thy train the sportive loves appear.

Gay are the flow'r-enamell'd vales;
What verdant foliage decks the green!
Sweet odours wing the balmy gales;
Love's smiles adorn the charming scene;
Now hoary winter sculks away,
And yields the sceptre to the lovely May.

How sweetly swells the blackbird's note!
Sweet sing the woodlarks in the grove;
Hark how the linnet's tuneful throat
Warbles the melting strains of love!
But faintly strive the pinion'd choir,
Till the sweet Cuckoo strings the vernal lyre.

Say, lovely guest, oh!  wilt thou stay!
Nor leave Britannia's favour'd isle,
So shall each joyful month be May,
Our landscapes wear the eternal smile:
Gladness still hail the new-born day,
And love shall bear an universal sway.

Ah!  no, ere long thy pleasing note
No more shall make the groves resound;
No more the Cuckoo strain her throat,
And flow'rs shall cease to deck the ground;
Joy shall forsake the verdant lawn,
And mournful larks forget to hail the dawn.

These charming sweets will shortly fade,
Bright summer must resign her crown,
Winter will soon these scenes invade,
Will soon resume its wonted frown:
(Ah!  gloomy scene) the tempests roar,
And warbling songsters charm the groves no more.

Attend, fond youth! the lesson's thine,
Thus fly thy gay, thy heedless hours;
Alas!  thy bloom must soon decline,
And wither like the vernal flow'rs;
Thy May will shortly disappear,
And age will strew thy hoary paths with care.

Let me employ the present hour,
In works of sweet benevolence,
So may I hail that heav'nly pow'r,
That Angel sent to call me hence:
My raptur'd soul shall wing its way,
To those blest climes where ev'ry month is May.
