If late I paus'd upon the Twilight plain
Of Fontenoy, to weep the Free born Brave,
Sure Fancy now may cross the Western Main,
And melt in sadder pity for the Slave.

Lo!  where to you plantation drooping goes
The Sable herd of human kind, while near
Stalks a pale despot, and around him throws
The scourge that wakes &mdash; that punishes the tear.

O'er distant beaches mournful murmurs run,
And join the rude yell of the tumbling tide,
As faint they ply their labours in the sun,
To feed the luxury of British pride!

E'en at this moment on the burning gale
Floats the weak wailing of the female tongue;
And can that sex's softness nought avail&mdash;
Must naked woman shriek amidst the throng?

O cease to think, my soul!  what thousands die
By suicide and toil's extreme despair;
Thousands, who never rais'd to heaven the eye,
Thousands, who fear'd no punishment but there.

Are drops of blood the horrible manure
That fills with luscious juice the teeming cane?
And must our fellow creatures thus endure,
For traffic vile, th' Indignity of pain?

Yes, their keen sorrows are the sweets we blend
With the green bev'rage of the morning meal,
The while to love meek mercy we pretend,
Or for fictitious ills affect to feel.

Yes, 'tis their anguish mantles in the bowl
Their sighs excite the Briton's drunken joy;
These ign'rant sufferers know not of a SOUL,
That we enlightened may its hopes destroy.

And there are men, who, leaning on the laws,
What they have purchas'd, claim a right to hold&mdash;
Curs'd be the tenor, curs'd its cruel cause&mdash;
FREEDOM'S a dearer property than Gold!

And there are men with shameless face have said,
"That nature form'd the NEGROES for disgrace;
That on their limbs subjection is display'd&mdash;
The doom of slavery stamps upon their face."

Send your stern gaze from Lapland to the Line,
And ev'ry region's natives fairly scan,
Their forms, their force, their faculties, combine,
And own the vast variety of man.

Then why suppose Yourselves the chosen few
To deal Oppression's poison'd arrows round,
To gall with iron bonds the weaker crew,
Enforce the labour and inflict the wound?

'Tis sordid int'rest guides you; bent on gain,
In profit only can ye reason find;
And pleasure too &mdash; but urge no more in vain
The selfish subject to the Social mind.

Ah how can he whose daily lot is grief,
Whose mind is vilified beneath the rod,
Suppose his maker has for him relief,
Can he believe the tongue that speaks of God?

For when he sees the female of his heart,
And his lov'd daughters torn by lust away,
His sons, the poor inheritors of smart&mdash;
&mdash;Had he religion, think ye he could pray?

Alas!  he steals him from the loathsome shed,
What time moist midnight blows her venom'd breath,
And musing how he long has toil'd and bled,
Drinks the dire balsam of consoling death.

Haste, haste, ye winds, on swiftest pinions, fly,
Ere from this world of misery he go,
Tell him his wrongs bedew a nation's eye,
Tell him BRITANNIA blushes for his woe!

Say, that in future, Negroes shall be blest,
Rank'd e'en as men, and men's just rights enjoy;
Be neither sold, nor purchas'd, nor oppress'd
No griefs shall wither and no stripes annoy.

Say, that fair freedom bends he holy
To cheer the infant and console the
So shall he, wond'ring, prove at [   ] light
And in a throb of ecstasy expire.

Then shall proud Albion's Crown, [   ] laurels twine
Torn from the bosom of the raging
Boast 'midst the glorious leaves a [   ] vine,
The radiant gem of pure humanity.
