With slow and solemn sound the tow'r clock tolls,
Its mournful cadence strikes upon my ears,
Tells in sad murmurs how time onward rolls,
And adds its moments to my sorrowing ears.

To grief and melancholy thought resign'd,
ALMERIUS courts dread Midnight's horrid gloom;
He hails its shades congenial with his mind,
And mourns neglected his unhappy doom.

Far from the soothing accents of a friend,
Where pity not one tear for misery sheds,
Where not humanity a smile will lend,
But grief unfolding her dark mantle spreads:

Far from the voice of JULIA and of love,
For me soft Sympathy has ceas'd to flow;
No more those lips with winning accents move,
And with their sweetness soothe the pang of woe.

How solemn and how grand's this midnight scene!
The moon's now hid beneath a low'ring cloud;
Now glimm'ring from on high she shines serene,
And brighten'd breaks forth from the blacken'd shroud:

She casts her beams o'er Nature's silent plains,
And in this tow'r emits a trembling ray,
Which lights the dungeon where a wretch remains,
To drear confinement an unhappy prey.

Now through the gates soft moves a gentle breeze,
Whose fragrant coolness fans my panting breast;
Abroad I hear the rustling of the trees
And the shrill screaming of the midnight guest.

I hear the lonely songster of the grove
In warbling accents pour its pensive song;
The song of sorrow and the song of love,
Which floating zephyrs gently waft along.

Far distant hence I hear the water's sound,
Which foaming tumbles from the rocky hills;
Rising, it throws its plaintive murmur round,
And all the air with fairy music fills.

Through night's sad gloom the watchful mastiff's cries,
With grating discord, drown the soothing strains,
When, list'ning every noise, he distant spies
Some awful phantom stalking o'er the plains.

What horrors hover in these chilly walls!
A dismal dread now damps my grief-warn heart!
Methinks some ghost with hollow screaming calls,
And groans and sighs the neighbouring cells impart.

Ah!  now a ghastly, frightful form appears,
And seems to whisper through the iron grates;
Slow o'er its haggard face roll fearful tears,
And wild despair its fiery eye dilates.

The grisly hairs stand stiff upon its head,
Within its hand a bloody knife it holds;
Around its limbs a filthy garb is spread,
Which, stain'd with gore, before the gale unfolds.

Now with the shadows of the night 'tis fled,
And left a pris'ner terrified with fear:
Ah!  'twas the spectre of some murder'd dead&mdash;
A sufferer, a Columbian, &mdash; names so dear!

Hail to Columbia's happy cultur'd fields!
Hail to her waving and her cooling shade!
There her blest sons enjoy what Nature yields,
And Freedom's charms th' extended realm pervade.

There the glad songs of peace and joy prevail;
No tyrant's hand inflicts inhuman woes;
Tranquil the swain roves through the shady vale,
And Freedom's charms th' extended realm pervade.

Once I, Columbia, dwelt upon thy shore,
And the glad strains of joy and freedom join'd,
To the rough dangers of the ocean wore,
And steer'd the stately ship with breast resign'd.

There my fond father and my mother live,
And sorrowing mourn their son's unhappy lot;
Thousands for ransom cheerfully they'd give&mdash;
But Poverty surrounds their weeping cot.

'Twas I supported their declining years,
Reliev'd their breasts of poverty and care&mdash;
That from their cheeks dispell'd Affliction's tears,
And rais'd their hopes to pleasure from despair.

There lovely JULIA sorrowful remains,
Fair as the beauty of the dawning morn;
Weeping she rambles o'er congenial plains,
While the soft graces all her steps adorn.

Can I forget the tender, last embrace,
Those words which zephyrs on their fragrance bore,
Th' expressive sorrow of that charming face,
When last we parted to embrace no more?

We haul'd the anchor from its dark abode,
Before the winds we spread the swelling sails;
We on the billows of the ocean rode,
And swiftly mov'd before propitious gales:

An Alg'rine corsair to our sight appear'd,
Ploughing the waves, the sons of prey drew nigh;
Upon the mast the bloody flag was rear'd,
And death terrific glimmer'd in each eye.

Howling approach'd the hell-hounds of Algiers,
The dreadful fauchion glitter'd in each hand,
The horrid prow its iron grapple rears,
The thundering Captain issues his command.

The vigour of a freeman's arm was vain,
In vain man's sacred rights and country plead;
Around our limbs they fold the galling chain&mdash;
See, O my country!  your brave freemen bleed!

Towards Algiers they bend their wat'ry way,
Whose warlike turrets, beaming from on high,
Strike in the gloomy soul a sick'ning ray,
And call a tear upon the sorrowing eye.

Ceas'd is the pleasure of a once gay breast;
Far fly my dungeon comfort and repose;
By labour and by tort'ring fiends oppress'd,
I find no ease but what frail hope bestows.

Ah!  cruel country!  can my groans and pain
Make no impression on thy callous heart?
Does not the glow of Sympathy remain?
Does not Humanity its sigh impart?

Art thou the land where Freedom rears her throne,
Where conquered WASHINGTON, where WARREN bled,
Where patriot Virtue, and where Valor shone,
And where oppression bow'd her guilt-stain'd head.

Adieu, Columbia, to thy fertile shore&mdash;
Adieu those joys which give to life its charm;
Within these walls ALMERIUS must deplore
The sleeping vigor of his country's arm.
