When the bright moon her lustre throws around,
To light the precincts of the sacred ground,
Where the rude peasants of the hamlet sleep,
Nor more impell'd with worldly cares to weep,
Be mine the fate to roam the tombs among,
Where gloom inspires with mournful thoughts my song&mdash;
Pause o'er the grave in which partakes repose
The frantic lover, freed from all his woes&mdash;
Or view the turf that hides the gentle frame
Of her whose smiles could admiration claim.

Perhaps, beneath this spreading cypress' gloom,
The village minstrel finds an early tomb,
Whom vernal flowrets, moist with glist'ning dews,
Weep o'er at night, in concert with the Muse.
In vain he sung the pastimes of the green,
Where comely swains and nymphs were often seen,
Beating at eve, in artless dance, the ground,
To the soft pipe and tabor's jocund sound.
Vainly his eye enthusiastic roll'd,
While the strung lyre his thoughts sublimely told;
For not tradition has preserv'd his song
That once claim'd plaudits from the list'ning throng.

Lo!  here the half-effac'd inscription shows
An aged parent finds his last repose,
Whose cottage, where the elm-tree skirts the road,
Rais'd by his hands, in rustic glory stood.
Oft did he share the labours of the day,
Where ears of corn in undulation play;
And when, at eve, he sought his happy home,
The crackling faggot cheer'd the cottage dome;
Nor did the house-wife view, without delight,
Her much-lov'd consort come to bless her sight;
While the soft babes, with prattling tongues, drew near,
His envied kiss, or kind caress to share.

But here the tablet, to the roving sight,
Proclaims the sexton sleeps in darkest night,
Who, thro' twelve years the peasant's grave had made,
Singing, regardless, o'er the uprais'd spade,
Nor heard, depress'd, the bell in solemn toll,
Announce his neighbour's late departed soul,
But to his labour at the summons sped,
To form another hillock o'er the dead.
Yet since on earth all trades alike await
Th' impending shaft of unaverting fate,
This man, who obsequies to thousands gave,
Here in this spot has found himself a grave.

But here, where flowers of hues fantastic grow,
The gentle shepherd, struck by death, lies low,
Who fed his flocks upon the mountain's brow.
Oft did he, at the orient morn, repair
To the sheep cote, where bleetings fill'd the air,
While his rough dog, with measur'd steps, behind,
In hoarse, short barking, bay'd the vernal wind.
No more his feet shall climb the steepy rock,
No more his hands shall shear the tender flock,
No more his lambs along the stubble ground
Crop the sweet plant, or in gay frolic bound;
Nor shall his pipe, with soft, melodious strain,
Breath to the praise of Daphne thro' the plain.
CAETERA DESUNT.
