Why should the rich, the man of lawless sway,
Engross the praises of the partial muse?
While ragged merit plods her weary way,
Then dies, and no kind hand the laurel strews.

The little Great, in pompous state, may sleep,
And pension'd poets strew their venal bays;
But who shall honor humble, friendless Sweep,
Whom fortune play'd the fool with, all his days.

The Muse divine could never yet be brib'd,
Nor can the Muse a hireling's pen inspire;
True worth, with energy, may be describ'd,
But the forc'd Maid restrains her ardent fire.

Th' indignant Muse will damn a Randolph's name;
But raise the humble Razman from the grave,
Will rouse a sleeping Sweeper into fame,
And save an honest man from Lethe's wave.

This Sweeper's life stole merrily along,
His tawny countenance was always gay;
On the lov'd chimney top, he sung his song,
And list'ning children quite forgot their play.

Tho' hooting school boys hiss'd the patient wight,
And powder'd foplings scorn'd his robe of soot,
These he forgave, regardless of the slight,
To those, in want, he kindly lent his hut.

His lowly lot forbade him to aspire;
A beggar's views, a lordly frown may stop&mdash;
To sweep his chimnies clean was his desire&mdash;
All his ambition was to gain the top.

He meekly trudg'd the city round each day,
Observing with a tear the hapless fate
Of the poor soldier &mdash; hunger's constant prey;
While Speculators rode in royal state.

And why shou'd we despise his humble trade?
"Act well your part, there all the honor lies."&mdash;
Razman swept clean &mdash; and shall his honor fade,&mdash;
Let Razman's name expire, and virtue dies.

How many &mdash; who canvass for their pow'r,
Have hitch'd thro' dirtier ways, than humble Sweep;
How many coxcombs, pageants of an hour,
Despis'd at last, thro' shame, up chimney creep!

Had Razman's merit found a due reward,
The chimney's top had been &mdash; not Britain's throne;
His brush had been a sceptre &mdash; not the rod&mdash;
That rod which made two millions people groan.

Tradesmen attend, and see a brother die;
No unswept chimnies in his visage stare,
No unbrush'd brick draws out the lengthen'd sigh
Tradesmen admire, and own such virtue rare.
