Nature, all-bounteous in her proferr'd joys,
Pours forth her pleasures with a lavish hand;
Invites each trav'ler to regale his sense,
And smiles in varied beauties on her sons.
Seasons alternate, serve to heighten bliss;
The calm, the tempest and the low'ring cloud,
The distant thunder and the sighing breeze,
Vales, mountains, plains and dark'ning forests charm
In all their rich variety of dress.

Far as the eye can see or thought extend,
Or fancy stretch her visionary flight,
All animated beings echo praise
In strains harmonious.  All but man!  Man, mute
And breathing discontent, looks sad, and frowns
Upon the pleasing scene.  Why this reverse?
Why is the noblest of Creator's works
Alone unhappy in the happy group?
On him alone does fortune frown?  On him
Shed torments that can wreck his peace, and check
Each rising rapture!  No!  Imagination
Pictures black terrors in his coward brain,
That find existence there and there alone.
Form'd to participate creation's sweets,
Capacitated for refined enjoyments
His evil genius turns them all to pain.
Imagination flies from real bliss,
Blinds safer Reason and aloft she soars
To call down curses on her vot'rie's head.

In life's bright dawn, her terrors take the root,
And spread and ripen in maturer years.
Soon as the infant learns its fears to lisp,
Alone, it starts at every rustling leaf,
And fancied Daemons sigh in ev'ry breeze;
Or in the gloom of night, conceal'd they stand
To dart upon the trembling victim's head
And crush to atoms innocence their foe!
Chill horror creeps through every vein!  Each nerve
Is stiffen'd, and with agonizing throbs the heart
Beats quick and wild!  'Till by a Parent's eye
All fears dispel, and hope once more revives
And conscious safety, every tumult calms.

In riper years when Reason seeks to rule,
Imaginary pains pursue us still,
Some dire misfortunes o'er our prospects hang
And threaten ruin to our dearest hopes.
The trembling lover now in absence pines,
Broods in sad silence, on the distant fair,
With heart-felt anguish sighs along the grove,
Reclines alone upon the moss-grown banks,
And softly murmurs to responsive rocks.
Fears rise on fears to drown each ling'ring hope
Of future bliss, till horror clad despair,
With sombre curtain overspreads the scene.

Now Superstition, with distorted brow,
Beholds a God as frightful as herself,
Beholds him frowning and in thunder cloath'd,
Darting his light'nings at each trembling wretch,
With pestilence impois'ning every breeze,
And scatt'ring horrors at his awful nod.
She views Him as a tyrant, cruel, proud,
Exulting in the tortures of mankind,
Pleas'd to extort the agonizing groan,
The writhe convulsive and expiring pang!
From fancy, wild unreal phantoms spring;
She raises idols to them prostrate falls
And groans at terrors which herself has rais'd.
Beneath the cumbrous burthen "Reason reels,"
Reluctant, and is chain'd to silence!  Sad,
But real picture of man's painful state!

Yea more!  Behold the maniack's woe-worn brow!
The vacant stare, the wild and furious glance,
Distorted features and convulsive shrieks,
Must harrow every tender breast with pain,
And wring each fibre that has sense to feel.
Here we behold the human mind laid waste!
Of Reason here the scatter'd ruins lie,
And man, degraded, fall'n below the brute,
Of worth, of virtue and of sense deprived,
Is buried in a mountain heap of woe!
Lost in the whirl of disconnected thought,
And brooding o'er her visionary scenes,
Here wild-eyed frenzy rears her livid form,
Here trembling stares unutterable grief,
While fury scintillates from either eye!
E'en cold misanthropy shrinks back aghast,
And turns with tears from the tremendous scene!
Say!  can Imagination thus pervert,
Thus counteract the pure designs of Heav'n?
Can she the human intellect unhinge?
Enslave our reason?  Bid mankind reject
The proffer'd joys of earth and cherish pain?
Bow half the world at Superstition's shrine
And frown triumphant on the mighty waste?

Alas!  she can!  Else why does Asia kneel
Submissive to her visionary Gods?
By what, except Imagination's force
Do Bramins wield their sceptre o'er the minds
Of all the Hindoo race?  Why worship brutes
Of each fantastick form and aspect rude?
Why does the tender female there, in dread
Breathless and faint beneath a weight of woe,
Obedient there to superstitious law,
Drag forth her tott'ring limbs to view the pyre
And trembling writh, and crispe beneath the flames?

Again, the shading visions of dull sleep
Increase the number of the pangs of life.
When night spreads o'er her robe with stars emblaz'd
And in man faculties are lock'd in sleep,
Unwearied Fancy still her vigil keeps;
Calls up aerial spectres to our view
And murky phantoms round our pillows flit.
We start from sleep with terror, faint, and still
The lingering vision hovers round the brain,
And hurls unwary Reason from her throne.

Or if we wander through the midnight shades,
And turn to Heav'n our scrutinizing eyes,
Imagination mounts on wings of fire
Through climes etherial:  There in some dim orb
Whose light penurious scarce illumes the sky
She views the Comets wild portentous blaze,
At whose approach the circling Planets reel,
Rush from their orbits to the blazing Sun,
Or flying wildly through unmeasured space,
The vast orbs mingle in chaotic strife,
And in one flame the Universe expire!

Oh thought tremendous!  Awe-inspiring scene!&mdash;
But hold! &mdash; Omniscience guides the rapid course;
With Love divine restrains their swift career,
Breathes o'er the Suns their life-enkindling flame,
And binds each wheeling system to its sphere.
Cease then to murmur at his just decrees,
With much submission bow before his law.
With grateful hearts receive his proferr'd joys
That smile around and with encreas'd delight,
Anticipate the purer bliss of Heav'n
Where circling Saints exalt the note of praise.
