The Arcadian shepherd dropt his beams from high,
Riding the fervid zenith of the sky;
O'er the parch'd fields, no lowing oxen strayed,
No sheep were bleating, and no zephyrs played;
Its lay, nor more the feather'd songster weaves,
But silent droops beneath the placid leaves.

'Twas now that OVIS o'er a fountain stood,
Her beauteous phiz admiring in the flood;
Hirca &mdash; the fairest of the goaty kind,
Upon the bank, thro' indolence reclin'd;
While in her eyes, love's gentle powers shone,
She thus to Ovis spoke in charming tone.

"Ovis!  you love; I too a flame confess
For one, whose beauties are than thine not less;
Therefore I dare you to yon grateful shade,
Form'd by the branches of the rising glade;
Thy lover's charms I dare thee here to sing,
The praise of mine shall make the meadow ring.

OVIS.
Nor dar'st in vain:  with pleasure I assume,
To sing the charms, which round my lover bloom,
I'll bet the wool, that o'er my bosom flows,
More soft than down, more white than driven snows,
That brighter charms around my Ramus rove,
Than deck the proudest monarch of your love.

HIRCA.
I'll stake the grateful beard upon my chin,
My lover's worth from thine the palm will win.
Gruntus, who now in yonder mire lies,
To judge the contest, at our wish, will rise.

Now with judge Gruntus, to the shade they mov'd,
To sing the lustre of the swains, they lov'd.

GRUNTUS.
Ovis!  'tis your's the contest to commence:
And mine the prize with justice to dispense.

OVIS.
Had I the voice of oxen &mdash; all around
Should with thy charms, oh Ramus!  loud resound;
Thy martial forehead and thy winning eyes,
I'll bellow forth, and echo thro' the skies.

HIRCA.
Could I as loud as regal lions roar,
The hills should catch thy beauties, o'er and o'er&mdash;
Dear Friscus!  then those charms should be exprest,
Which play such havoc in my tender breast.

OVIS.
Beside my love &mdash; o'er all the flock supreme,
Niggard and mean his stateliest subjects seem.
'Twas when against a huge rebellious foe,
With iron head, he aim'd a fatal blow,
I saw &mdash; admiring saw the grand affray:
But ah!  the conqueror stole my heart away.

HIRCA.
O'er all the herd, my Friscus also reigns&mdash;
Supreme o'er hills; supreme o'er all the plains.
'Twas when the herd together met to try,
What one could leap most actively on high,
Them all my capering lover far outshone,
Ah!  could I see; and call my heart my own.

OVIS.
Soft is the down, which flows upon my love;
Grand are his horns, and tower far above;
Sweet is his voice &mdash; far sweeter to my ear,
Than to my eye, the vernal flowers appear.

HIRCA.
Sleek is the hair, which o'er my lover glides;
Soft is his skin, his hair smooth-gliding hides;
Burnish'd the horns, which on his brow appear,
Sweeter his fragrance than the vernal air.

OVIS.
When I appear among the fleecy throng,
My Ramus hails me with his sweetest song:
Stately he moves, till I assume my seat;
Then, proudly humble, crouches at my feet.

HIRCA.
Whene'er I move and frolicsome appear,
My lover skips and prances thro' the air;
But when sedately I my footsteps guide,
He capers not, but muses by my side.

OVIS.
For me alone, he every danger braves,&mdash;
Brouses the grass, and in the wild brook laves;
For me alone he snuffs the fragrant gales,
And spurns the fair, who rove amid the vales.
If any beauties on the plain reside,&mdash;
These he deserts to gambol by my side.

HIRCA.
Friscus, my love that he alone may share,
Mounts the wild rocks, and wanton's thro' the air;
O'er craggy steeps he leaps, from brow to brow,
Capers aloft, and spurns the void below.
No charms in any other he espies,
But views all beauties, center'd in my eyes.

GRUNTUS.
Cease &mdash; cease your prating:  by my snout I swear,
You nought but grossest falsities declare:
Begone!  nor dare such themes to sing again;
Such themes are phantoms of a madden'd brain.

Now Ovis bleated; Hirca frisked with ire;
And Gruntus waddled to his bed of mire.
