O, ye, that now with strength superior crown'd,
Look from the nail supporting, like the best
Of all the cupboard; at whose sight my shoes
Hide their diminish'd head!  to you I call,
But with no fawning voice, and add your name,
O Boots!  to tell you how I'll use your strength,
That brings to my remembrance what supports
Ye were; what firm defence against each stone,
Projecting craggy; or more dread annoy
Minute of gravel; or the hateful herb
Of venom multifold, and thorns, and furze.
Till time and worse occasion wore ye down,
Well tried, well worn, ye were, and many a mile
Adventrous, on adventure doughty fraught,
Ye bore my feet fatigued; full time and toil
Mordacious brought ye low; nor did not then
This careful eye perceive, nor hand attempt
To stay the coming ill.  Full many a nail
Obdurate, with ferrean head and point
Of sharpest texture, has for many a day
Driven by this hand, withstood the grinding rage
Of rocks and roads; tho' now with glossy sole
Ye shine resplendent, and the cobler's hand,
With scientific skill, has stopp'd each leak,
Where erst the chilly waters found a way,
Not to the foot alluring; yet again,
If fail not understanding, ye shall prove
Each various peril; or in stirrup plac'd
Equestrian, or more humble walk at noon,
When wealthier wights shall mount the pamper'd steed,
And give the guiding rein; for not to me,
For not to me, in stall well strew'd and straw'd,
Stands, the apt courser.  No; my Boots, these feet,
These Decemdigitipedum, must still
O'er many a furze-fill'd heath and rugged rock
Annoyant, bear me far with your support.

Thro' what variety of untried walks;
Thro' what new scenes and countries must we pass.
The wide, the unbounded prospect lies before us,
But vapours, fogs, and tempests rest upon it!
Here will I pause &mdash; if there's a walk in store&mdash;
And that there is, all Nature cries aloud
In all her charms &mdash; it somewhere sure must lead us,
And that whereto it leads us shall be pleasant.
But when, or where, or why, or how it shall be,
I'm weary of conjecture &mdash; this shall end them.
