DISHCLOTH.
What griping pains and grunting can annoy
A wench like thee?  oh la, why groans my joy?
My Tabby Soapsuds, why dost curl thy head,
Hast lost thy Jews-harp, is thy cabbage dead?
Thy ewes have lambs, and pumpkins glad the plain,
Thy Daddy's honey, Soapsuds don't complain.

SOAPSUDS.
Oh, giggling Dishcloth, when I seek relief,
To raise a horse-laugh while I strain with grief!

DISHCLOTH.
Ah Tabby Soapsuds, how could Dishcloth GUESS
The reason of your sniv'ling globes, unless
Your hen-roost robb'd, or thundergusts have blown
All your fine gourd-shells and your hop-poles down.
Your sweetheart loves you like an Indian-dumplin;
No Drake is truer to his Duck than Grumplin,
His heart's like bees-wax, or I'd nam'd him FIRST.

SOAPSUDS.
Ah!  were he so, I'd spit at all the REST.

DISHCLOTH.
Don't fret your gizzard, not a truer swain
Carts dung with Buck and Dobbin o'er the plain.

SOAPSUDS.
'Mid pots and swill-tubs once how blest were I,
And Cupid's pitch-forks never made me cry:
Till knock-knee'd Grumplin parch'd my soul so dry.
Curse on his squint eyes and his grisly wig,
What curse of fate could send him here to dig?
Ah fatal day when red nos'd Grumplin came,
Astride on Dobbin with his hoes and team.
I was all mirthful leaning on my tub,
When crack-brain'd Cupid sent him here to grub.
Well I remember the dear youth's ADDRESS;
No cock round hen could strut with such a GRACE;
Loud as a Porpoise did he snort his sighs,
Soft as new mush his killing tongue and eyes!
When spite of all my strife, love jabb'd his dart
Like a hot poker into Soapsuds' heart!
Ah me!  I droop'd like pullets with the pip,
And his huge turnip-eyes gave me the hip!
On hogs and goose-ponds have I ever kept
My wall'wing shoats and much pleasure reapt;
The grubber's bow'd and scrap'd with humble grace,
But I disdainful spit right in their face,
Till this false swain that scorch'd my liver, drove
Into my soul a hogshead full of love!
Ah Grumplin!  lay this juggling all aside,
I'm almost crazy to be made your bride:
My heart is big as squashes, and too great
For you in this most cruel way to treat.
I know you're fair, you are a lovelier thing
Than top-knot of the Turkey-cock in spring:
My rolling pair of skinn'd potatoes languish,
But know they've scoured many a soul with anguish.
Come to these arms, you cruel churlish dog,
That I may squeeze you, as I would a hog.
