Of woman's disobedience, and the fruits
Of list'ning hazardous, most bold attempt
In ancient blanket, full of rags and holes
Sing heavenly muse; whether on Pinda's top
Or snowy Haemus, where the enchanted woods
Danc'd to the well-tun'd lyre of Orpheus old,
Thou first harmonious; or if Helicon
Delight thee more, with shady groves opaque,
Thence I invoke thee to my advent'rous song.

Say, goddess, for thou know'st, what happy soil
Claims old Hippobilus, for deeds benign,
And hospitable act to wearied steps,
Full famous; him, where Orwell's silver streams
In various meanders curling slow
Near Gippovicum (wherein arms renown'd
Erst dwelt the Iceni, Rome's audacious host)
With Lemster frize his shoulders round adorn'd,
Such as three well fraught ships from wealthy Ind,
Ne'er wafted o'er the ocean's vast convex,
And band of large extent, and hat broad-brim'd,
Melantius and Philander, sophists grave,
From far is as hacks, raw-bon'd, descending met;
Nor with more joy, of reverence profound
Received Philemon, Jove of thrones the prime,
When from the azure welken down he came
With Maja's joy in human shapes divine,
To see what chear on earth the gods might find,
For none he found in heav'n from man ingrate,
Nor fume of victim slain now reach'd the sky.

So welcom'd he his friends, with firm resolve
His guests determin'd; on he led the way,
With many a caper brisk and antick round,
Eager to raise his spouse, whom still he ween'd
In down procumbent.  Oh!  had she the joy
Equal to his conceiv'd, nor from her bed
In condescension meek disdain'd parole!
But with stern frown, to whom respect was due,
Him she rejected; and his just behests
Of aid and presence dear; the guests she scorn'd
For him companions fit, her self-deserving
Better or none she deem'd; then back reclin'd
Longer repose embrac'd.  Proud fain, sleep on,
Yet happy, if thou know'st, to know no more.

Nor daunted was at the rebuke severe
Hippobilus, quick to the mart he hies
For choicest viands, and as quick returns.
Fraught with hip, thigh and loin of grawling lamb
Stole from the bleating ewe; his left hand grasp'd
Lettice and Allium, fare delicious!
Before him march'd in wooden pen upbore
With pointed hooks, defended thornbacks broad,
Maids with long tails (by some in waggery call'd)
Crabs retrograde and sociable soles,
Sweetest of fish that swim the ocean stream.
These having order'd for their hooks repast
He to his guests repair'd, with bland excuse,
And plausible apology for absence long,
And otherwise affront impardonable,
High misdemeanour!  them he found agape
Its curious picture pendant from the wall
Kneel eniate or verriate; to whom the paroch 'gan
With awful cringe, and fault'ring tongue to make
Utterance of compliment; which soon espy'd
By good Philander he with front serene
Thus spoke; there needs not venerable host,
Excuse for leaving us in solitude,
Well have we here been entertain'd; behold
This image fair, whose lively sparkling eyes
Dart lightning tremulous and contagious fire,
Here have we been affix'd; but say (on earth
If such can live and draw aetherial air)
Whom may this represent?  what happy mate
Enjoys this heavenly beauty?  for till now
Such never I beheld; nor may with him
Two baffled deities that on Ida strove
Compare, the third might equal not exceed.

Thus spake the youth enflam'd, and age reply'd,
My friends, your pardon will be best bestow'd
First ask'd for; which submissive I implore,
And take it as a gift for rudeness coarse,
Nor unattended had ye sat, forlorn,
Had not my spouse (to whom unmerited praise
And honour too sublime Philander gives)
With ach of tooth malign, jaw-racking pain
Been from her lov'd obsequiousness detain'd;
But come, be free; since ye have thus vouchsaf'd
To be my guests, whate'er I have, be pleas'd
To call your own.  He scarce had ended speech,
When with din hideous and strong rebuff
A door upon the brazen hinges turn'd,
Disgorging monster, horribly uncouth
In laneous mantle (by the vulgar hight
A blanket) clad.  Abash'd the paroch stood,
Amaz'd, confounded at the dire mishap,
Deeming some vagrant sprite from dark abyss,
Might sinful man perplex; or haply fearing
Some gambol antichristian, lewd and vile,
With mirth unseasonable might their ease molest.
Nor trembled more the soul of Amphix huge
As founded, where fam'd Orpheus' ancient king
O're swarthy Aethiopian sceptre sway'd,
When Albaniades his gorgon dire
Phorcynian, on his foes undaunted bore
Amphix and Eryx, oft in battles known,
Had Thessalas and Phineas, warriours old,
Whose frozen blood condens'd, and stubborn limbs
Of victory eternal movements stand.
Mean while the griesly phantome lay prostrate,
With crush of ruinous fall of speech bereft
And motion; nor from thence had ere arose,
Had not Minerva (who from Heaven star-pav'd
With courage high and might invincible,
And plum'd his helm and smoke and bickering flame,
While troops dardanian fled and glad forsook
Patroclus by stern Hector's javelin slain)
Once more came down.  She on parod's head
Like the bicornous moon resplendent sate,
Fast by his temples, horror soon dispelling,
And from that had his trowzes gay distain'd
With auburn hue ill-favour'd.  Up he rose,
And with fierce paw the goblin seiz'd; but oh!
Such plagues, ye gods, from holy band avert!
Nor spright, nor gambol, but his bosom friend,
Soul of his soul, his tender spouse he finds,
Who stealing from bed with silent step
Down to the room by terret way had come,
Smit with the love of hearing their discourse,
And to the door press'd her attentive ear.
She to his touch obsequious, 'gan to raise
Her founder'd limbs, when the eager nipping aim
Provok'd her gentle hand to lightly touch
Those parts best secret kept to mortal eye.
She in the mantle finding horrid chasm,
And discontinuous wounds discovering shame,
Up sprang, nor staid, but with precipitous haste
As would her feeble joynts permit, retir'd,
Leaving her wondering guests, who still the image
Of dazling bum in faithful mind retain.

So when Diana with meridian beams
Dispirited, or chace of furious boar
Arcadian, in Gorgaphie fruitful vale,
Where purling brooks and streams nectarious flow,
Thro' many a shady bower and verdant plain,
Her virgin limbs refreshing, waked saw
Actaeon, Cadma's son advent'rous,
Bashful she fled into the dark recess
Of hemoral love, and from the piercing sight
Of eye ambitious charms divine conceal'd.
