Reclin'd upon a bed of down,
(From some sad debtor ruthless torn)
The Lawyer closed his wearied eyes;
Intreating sleep, grown coy, his rest to crown,
That with the early sun's uprise
He might his wonted path pursue
Where orphan's goods attract his eager view,
Whose spoils already half his house adorn!
And where, by potent aid of pliant law
He may their little all, in his deep vortex draw.

Sudden a ray of distant light
Invades the doubly-closed recess;
His hov'ring slumbers put to flight,
And with increasing blaze, his eyes oppress.
His curtain opes!  a form whose look
His guilty soul with fear and horror shook
Fast by his side in blood-stain'd robes appears,
And in his quivering hand, a dazzling mirror rears!

"Dost thou not know me?  ah, full soon
Shall we terrific converse hold,
Unless thou grant'st my righteous boon,
And quit thy cruel thirst of gold!"
Slowly he rais'd his drooping head,
And to the vision, tremb'ling, thus he said,
"Who art thou?  and what mighty sacrifice
Requir'st my passport to the shades of peace!"

"My name is Conscience!  oft in vain
I strove to touch thy flinty heart;
But when at length, access I gain
Think not too lightly I depart!
'Tis Restitution!  I demand!
May that dread word, still thunder in your ear,
Till it  unclench your yet unsparing hand,
And of your crimes in part my records clear.

"Behold!  where in this mirror true,
Yon injur'd woman, fainting lies!
Her helpless orphans, robb'd by you,
Have sent to Heaven, their plaintive cries!
God heard them!  and commission'd me
Still on your midnight vigils to attend;
Till you his high avenging arm should see,
Or by restoring, make your Judge your friend!

"See further in that gloomy jail,
Your aged victim hopeless pines!
Nor aught his recent plunder can avail,
While famine, sickness, aid your dark designs!
The little your rapacious hand
Has failed to reach, your greedy eyes allure;
And Death, that little to secure,
Awaits, prepared to strike, at your command!
Haste then!  make restitution!  set him free!
Or in a louder voice you yet will hear from me!"
