The marble tomb, the proudly sculptur'd bust,
The vain may prize, to make their mem'ry live;
But can these keepers frail retain their trust?
Time mingles all, unconscious of reprieve.

In vain th' impassion'd verse shall tell their fate,
All varnish'd o'er, to cheat admiring eyes;
But scann'd by truth, their gaudiest colours fail,
And but to fade their greenest laurels rise.

Not so who look beyond this earthly sphere,
Their paths more brighten'd by the heavenly light,
Who sees no recompense from honors here,
Nor by dissentions human praise invite.

What tho' their truth held on its humble way,
Along the peaceful calm serene of life,
Their virtues never blaz'd upon the day,
In ostentation with the sons of strife.

Tho' unadorn'd their truth in simple plight,
Nor like a harlot us'd a false disguise,
Redd'ning a wrathful meteor on the sight,
Nor borrow'd trappings from the worldly wise.

Still should their loss impel a generous tear,
If ever Gratitude its debt confess'd,
Or ever virtue earn'd a tribute dear,
Or ever justice warm'd the human breast.

CORBYN, departed from this world of woe,
Might well demand the panegyric lay;
Might well compel the feeling source to flow,
Or plead example for the warmest praise.

Not so he wish'd &mdash; but as some modest flower,
Breathes its sweet fragrance on some lonely soil,
He sav'd the wretched from affliction's power,
And eas'd the yoke of misery and toil.

As Enoch walking, it sufficed to know,
They felt the good, for whom it was design'd;
In blessing blest, the high extatic glow,
Leaves lesser praises, for each lesser mind.

Those feel that peace the world cannot give,
And give as freely as to them a given;
They hear that voice the world will not receive,
The songs of triumph, and the harps of heaven.

Pure source of love, and principle of truth,
In every bosom still thyself reveal;
Still bear thy witness in our rising youth,
Still let the aged all thy influence feel.

This vital spirit shall declare its source,
From everlasting yields to no decline;
This, like the eagle, shall renew its force,
Its end perfection, and its aim divine.
