Oh memory!  thou busy source of pain!
Thou actor of our miseries o'er again!
Thou harsh intruder!  whose tormenting pow'r,
Instilling thought embitters every hour;
Forego thy bitter unrelenting sway,
Nor doom to horrours every coming day.
Ah what avails imagination's powers
With fancied bliss to cheat the tardy hours,
Whose sweet delusions banish care away
And to the mind bestow perpetual day;
If the sad soul is wrapp'd in joyless gloom
And sighs and lingers for the welcome tomb.
The sun with boundless glory fills the skies
And myriads joys where fair Hindostan lies:
Yon silver orb with fainter beams invite
The pensive muse each phylosophick night,
Those heavenly spheres resplendent gild the pole
And tell what hand supports and rules the whole.
Springs verdant charms now deck the joyful land,
And bounteous nature spreads with lavish hand,
Whilst ev'ry grove with feather'd choirs resounds
And richest paintings fill the smiling grounds,
When Summer heats prevail, the clown oppress'd,
Hies to the shade and lays him down to rest;
Whilst the dark wood a sweet asylum shows
Where the rap't soul with inspiration glows:
And Autumn next displays her reapen'd plain
Crown'd with rich fruits and fill'd with golden grain.
All, all, in vain. &mdash; The universe bestows
No charms, no pleasures, to deceive his woes.
The woodland warbling jars his sated ear&mdash;
The country lies a desart &mdash; wild and drear&mdash;
He wisely shuns the silent solemn glade
For harsh reflection haunts the gloomy shade.
Autumnal riches no new bliss supply;
They nothing yield to please the mental eye,
See, icy Winter chearless reigns around
And cities throng'd with mirth and joy abound;
The bliss which from the social mixture flows,
No gaiety, no happiness bestows;
Forlorn, unhappy, wretched, does he feel;
And prove how hard the task an anguish'd mind to heal.
Say from what source, can memory impart,
One pleasing sense to sooth the murderer's heart?
When busy fancy brings the injur'd shade
To haunt his solitude, his peace invade?
The guilty wretch, who waded to the throne
Thro' kindred blood, from danger conscious grown,
Now by the trembling limb and bloodless cheek
Betrays his crimes; nor can a refuge seek
From bleeding forms, who bare the mangled breast,
And to his frighten'd vision stand confest&mdash;
Behold that wretched tyrant youth expire;&mdash;
His frame consumed by more than mortal fire;
Stung by remorse, not all the charms of art,
Could hush his cares, or ease his aching heart:
Each hour recalls, the bloody dreadful day,
When by his mandate thousands slaughter'd lay,
When in cold blood confounding youth and age
His wretched subjects felt his bigot rage.
O, friend to Virtue!  whose all powerful aid,
Sooner or later owns the heav'nly maid;
In terrours cloth'd, the villain's mind assail;
And with just vengeance tear aside the veil,
That from himself his hideous portrait hides
And for his crimes a lasting scourge provides.
See the proud monument and marble bust,
With useless pomp insult the humble dust;
Whilst gorgeous pageants more supremely show,
That all parade is mockery of woe;
Unheeded by the father, lover, friend,
Who o'er the grave in silent anguish bend&mdash;
Will no kind genius watch the fatal hour,
And blunt the invidious tyrant's baleful power?
Lull with a syren's spells the aching sense,
And to the mind lethargick aid dispense?
Ah no &mdash; for all is horrour and dismay;
While yet the husband hugs the breathless clay.
Ten thousand thousand sad illusions rise
To aid his anguish and increase his sighs&mdash;
Now is recall'd each hour, each happy day
That smooth'd life's passage of the dreary way;
Now do contrasted pleasures mock his woes,
And to impending grief, lost virtue's charms oppose.
When the loud gate's tempestuous force descends,
And sharpest light'ning heav'ns vast concave rends;
Whilst thro' the crackling rigging howls the storm,
And naught prevails but tumult and alarm;
Then to the youthful breast of him who roves,
Far from the mistress whom he fondly loves;
Malicious mem'ry proves her hated art
And emulates the vile tormentor's part,
O, cursed gold!  the source of various woe;
From whom our sorrows more than pleasures flow:
In search of thee, I brav'd the faithful seas,
To gain by added fortune future ease:
For visionary wealth I wildly roam,
And madly leave my plighted love and home;
Fool, not to know, that competence was bliss,
And certain happiness exchange for this!
Let me again behold my native shore,
And I will tempt th' uncertain waves no more.&mdash;
But most when madness rules th' unhappy hour
Must wretched man sustain thy keenest power;
All other sense of joys or sorrows gone,
And the whole soul absorb'd with one alone.
Hail!  thou great master of the magick pen
Whose piercing eyes beheld the hearts of men;
Hast thou not forc'd the sympathetick tear
With the keen horrours of thy frenzy'd Lear?
When to his comfort ev'ry door was clos'd,
And bare he stood to pelting storms expos'd;
The fretful elements contend in vain,
They hurt not him whose agonized brain
Dwells on a father's violated right,
And tells his sorrows in the ear of night,
While rain, and storm, and lightning, all conspire
To aid "th' unnat'ral hags" against their sire.
Remembrance, ever constant, points the pain,
Shews him his wrongs, and tells them o'er again;
For when in lonely hovel he descries,
In seeming madness where sad Edgar lies,
Poor wretch, says he, thy fate is hard indeed;
Naught but ingratitude has done this deed.
Where far remote some desart island lies,
Midway in seas, and curs'd by wintry skies,
Some shipwreck'd mariner perchance now strays
A hapless wand'rer, doom'd to pass his days
'Midst barren rocks, where hideous monsters roar,
And tempests rage forever round the shore;
From mankind banish'd he must ever weep,
And curse the fate which sav'd him from the deep;
Happy would sweet oblivion prove but kind,
And blot remembrance from his wretched mind:
Oft at the ling'ring close of cheerless day,
What time is seen afar Sol's parting ray
Gleam o'er the deep:  the scenes long past arise;
His throbbing bosom heaves with struggling sighs;
Sad, in despair, he views th' extended main,
And thinks on joys he ne'er must see again.
But oh, what bliss!  when on the farthest verge
Of distant horizon, the faithless surge
Wafts towards his ravish'd sight a distant sail;
Oh with what extacies he feels the gale
That onward brings the long, long wish'd for aid,
So long to his unceasing prayers delay'd.
Alas!  stern Fate relentless heeds no sigh;
For see, the unconscious vessel passes by
With rapid motion., leaves the aching sight,
And all is lost in one unbounded night.

Say, who to dulness' stupid sway consign'd,
All pleasing thoughts of happiness resign'd?
Reflecting, dwells on scenes enjoy'd before,
And not laments those scenes to come no more?
Thus the poor exile from his native home,
By ruthless force, abroad compell'd to roam;
Whether from Afric or from Callia driven,
Sees for his portion naught remain but heav'n:
In foreign countries doom'd to beg or toil,
With heart-corroding grief reflects the while
On his dear native land, and former ease,
And those lov'd scenes where all was wont to please:
Whilst this with unavailing grief complains,
Of ruin'd fortunes, and usurp'd domains.
For such, Compassion heaves the sorrowing sigh,
Whilst social tears suffuse soft Pity's eye.
But say, ye grasping avaricious fools,
In whom the love of money only rules;
Who with insatiate wants forever curs'd,
Behold the doom of prosp'rous fate revers'd;
Say, can you claim of sympathy the meed?
For your distress what pitying heart will bleed?
The proffer'd boon of competence was naught;
Unbounded wealth your greedy purpose sought,
Yet bless'd with all that mortals could implore,
Your narrow, sordid hearts still grasp'd at more;
Still for superfluous riches spent those hours,
Ordain'd to exercise far nobler powers&mdash;
Now doom'd in poverty your days to close,
And with departed joys contrast impending woes.
Thee!  sad Remembrance, we then fly in vain,
By thee reflection brings continuous pain,
Thy constant power the art of man defies,
Times past incessant to his thoughts arise:
Alas!  how few th' intrusive view can bear?
How oft excited, starts Contrition's tear?
Yet not alone art thou to self confin'd;
With other woes th' historian wrings the mind:
'Tis but to seek the thicket's inmost shade,
Possess'd of Clio's stores implore their aid;
Instant we pierce the distant maze of time,
And view the ills of ev'ry age and clime;
O then what gloomy objects rise to view!
In the long lapse of time, behold how few
The friends of virtue and of good appear,
With casual joy to check the constant tear.
Life's varied scenes delusive seem, and vain,
Producing naught but sorrow, grief, and pain;
And this sad truth forever wounds the mind,
That man's most deadly foe is human kind.
In vain the eager eye with ardour pores
On classick pages, and the time explores,
When Roman virtue and the patriot's pride
To gods above, the human soul ally'd.
Ages of crime and wretchedness succeed,
The wicked triumph, and the virtuous bleed;
Whilst monster tyrants in succession show
The sad varieties of human woe;
And long old Rome is seen in sullied state,
Her freedom sacrificed to factious hate.&mdash;
Extend our views; regard the christian world;
The crescent, and the cross, behold unfurl'd;
The red-cross banner waves o'er Europe's land,
And christian rage and folly now command:
Still human blood in streams perpetual flow,
The baleful flames of persecution glow,
And Heav'n's meek child, Religion, sacred maid!
To desarts flies, and seeks Retirement's shade:
There with her God in peace secure remains,
Whilst all the world her sacred name profanes.
The tyrant's pretext, and the Impostor's aid;
See for destruction drawn the murd'rous blade.
In Gallia's land, on Belgium's hapless shore,
Holy fanaticks lavish human gore.
A bigot woman &mdash; Britain's lasting shame,
There, points the sword, or blows the cruel flame.
Now warriour monarchs peaceful realms invade,
To gain those laurels which may never fade;
The battle ended, and the millions slain,
Say, is the victor's brow entwin'd in vain?
Long shall they flourish? &mdash; Yes, the tyrant's name,
Th' indignant page will damn to lasting fame.&mdash;
The bloody thirst of gold contemn'd the waves,
And ravag'd shores the southern ocean laves;
The name of Cortez pains the sorrowing mind;
Pizarro's fame to ages goes consign'd.&mdash;
Hence, dismal visions!  leave my wearied soul&mdash;
O come, some pow'r, the baleful thoughts controul&mdash;
Leave me not wrapp'd in one eternal night,
But with enchantment charm my blunted sight&mdash;
It comes &mdash; it comes propitious to my view;
'Tis no deceit, great WASHINGTON, 'tis you!
O ever present to the wond'ring mind,
Be all thy virtues, all thy deeds confin'd:
So shall fair nature boast one brilliant light
To cheer in history's page the constant night.
