The Sun's reflection from the western sky,
Now smiles adieu to valley, grove and rill;
His setting beams awhile delight the eye,
Then gradual fade beyond the misty hill.

Pale Cynthia now assumes her silver throne,
While lost in splendor fades the tinge blue;
No sound is heard, but zephyr sighs alone,
As from his wing he shakes the falling dew.

Now all serene, appears the distant deep,
While scarcely stirs the breezes whisp'ring breath,
On every side see drowsy nature sleep,
In silence deep as in the reign of death.

Beside yon stream on which the moon-beams play,
On yonder hill which overlooks the main;
When Fancy calls, I often love to stray,
To give free scope to her fantastic train.

I to the hallow'd spot again repair,
Once more shall Fancy's ardour-beaming eye,
Dwell on her sportive images of air,
Or pierce the clouds that veil futurity.

Perhaps like me, beneath this cypress shade,
Some hopeless son of Sorrow erst reclin'd;
And while this turf, his lonely seat was made,
Some wild vagary fill'd his anxious mind.

Here, while his sighs were borne upon the breeze,
Would of his wayward destiny complain,
And to the moon that glitter'd thro' the trees,
Would tell the plaintive story of his pain.

How niggard fortune had with envious hand,
Each fairy wreath of wealth and pleasure torn;
And how a cruel father's stern command,
Compell'd him still a hapless love to mourn.

Or how stern death, had nipp'd in early youth,
That life, where center'd all his earthly peace;
Had render'd vain, their mutual vows of truth,
And rous'd him from his dream of fancied bliss.

Or how perchance his mistress faithless prov'd,
And held his humble, modest love in scorn;
And while he thought himself her best belov'd,
Some happier swain from him the prize had borne.

But now thy gentle spirit is at rest,
Nor fate, nor fortune, more thy peace betray;
No more shall grief disturb thine anxious breast,
Nor Beauty's smiles thy fancy lead astray.

No more shalt thou frequent the lonely shade,
When evening bids the varied scene be still;
No more when on thy silent pillow laid,
Shall Delia's form thy raptur'd fancy fill.

If death remov'd her from thy fond embrace,
No more shalt thou her grave with tears bedew;
If Fortune cross'd thy chosen path to peace,
'Tis now forgot beneath the funeral yew.

If from the cruel damsel's scorn alone,
Each gloomy care that fill'd thy bosom came;
Perhaps that now, thou art forever gone,
She may with grief recall thy hapless name.

The distant clock, now breaks my reverie,
Farewell thou airy dream of fancy wild;
But at this spot, I'll oft revert to thee,
When Cynthia's light shall gild the evening mild.
