When Comedy, poor dame was old,
A vagrant strumpet and a scold,
The beadle forc'd her to remain
In a tall cage near Drury lane:
Her children all, with different faces,
Sprang from promiscuous embraces,
With bawling, ballad-singing yell,
Crowded around her vaulted cell:
Till once, 'tis said, in riot frisky,
High prim'd with true Hibernian whiskey,
The motley Savoyarding band
In the piazza took their stand:
And as they oft had tried apart
The mumming masquerading art
Each, to please the gaping crowd,
Rehears'd his separate part aloud.

First Snip snap aim'd her skill to try,
(A spurious branch of repartee)
And giggling laugh'd she knew not why,
E'en at her own affected glee.

Next enter'd puzzle-headed Plot,
His limbs a fowler's net surrounded;
Striving to tear each stubborn knot,
His left "confusion worse confounded!"

But thou, Stage Loyalty, all boast and brag,
What was thy sublime oration?
Where'er the scene, or false, or true,
Whether in China or Peru,
Still, still it prais'd the English nation,
And to Britannia bade the world submit;
Still would the patriot strain prolong,
And from the gallery, box and pit
Call bowling Encore, to repeat the song;
And whilst in his own praise he spoke
Encore stood by and bawl'd out "hearts of Oak;"
Whilst Loyalty huzza'd and wav'd the British flag:

And longer had he wav'd &mdash; but cleft in two
Arch-rainbow Scenery arose,
His trembling lips the magick whistle blew,
And straight appear'd the craggy rocks,
High mountains, drawing-rooms and flocks,
Prisons to guard a truant daughter,
And cataracts of real water;
And dapper trees in new green clothes,
All nodding "How d'ye do," in rows;
And though sometimes, each loud applause between,
Rejected Costume at his side,
"All this is mighty pretty," cried;
"But tell me, gaudy painter, what
It has to do with me or Plot?"
Still Scenery lengthen'd out his tether,
And Europe, Asia, Afric, danc'd a jig together.

Thy gambols, Farce, now high, now low,
Were nought but war-whoop, stride and grin;
'Twas now philanthropy in Merchants' Row,
And now a boasted harlequin.

With eyes upturn'd and hose unmended,
Pale Sentiment a tub ascended,
And from her methodistick throne,
In piteous lamentable tone,
Pour'd in Soliloquy the doleful note,
While caught from box to box around,
Dulness bore the soothing sound,
Soft o'er the pit the drowsy murmur's float
And round the gall'ries flit in fond delay;
Till tir'd with clapping and encoring,
All gently nodding, dozing, snoring,
In sleep the audience died away.

But O how alter'd was the wondering stare,
When mad Buffoonery, leaping forth to view,
A fool's-cap jingling on his crown,
One stocking red, the other blue,
Cried "dam'me, that's your sort," and knock'd old Squaretoes down;
Then strew'd the earth with broken crockery ware.
The heroes of the upper gallery go
In gathering crowds to see the show,
Creeping from forth their alleys low;
Exulting Folly join'd the yell,
And Bedlam shook his chains through every cell.

Last came Pun, as Janus sturdy,
He in zig-zag motions prancing;
To the jews-harp his teeth address'd;
But soon he spied the hurdy-gurdy,
Whose buzz ambiguous pleas'd his ear the best.
They would have thought who heard him gabble
His Babel jargon to the rabble,
They saw in village pool a goose,
Her red beak split, her pinions loose,
To her own hisses madly dancing.
Whilst as conundrums round he flung,
Pun join'd with Folly in an Irish reel;
Naked her body was, and light her heel,
And he, sworn foe to melancholy,
Scorning to be outdone by Folly,
Shook nameless nothings from his quiv'ring tongue.

O Comedy, thou fallen fair!
Friend to pleasure, foe to care,
Now common grown to half the town&mdash;
Where is thy former fair renown?
Whene'er stage history records
The memory of thy wedded lords,
Dost thou no fond remembrance feel
For Congreve, Coleman, Cibber, Steele?
Hadst thou reserv'd for such a race
Thy matrimonial, chaste embrace,
Thy womb had ne'er produc'd to view
This spurious raggamuffin crew.
'Tis said, and I believe the tale,
Thy lash of old could more avail,
Wrought more amendment from the stage,
Than all that charms this senseless age.
For shame!  give o'er this vagrant life,
Become once more a wedded wife;
Or turn to fasting, prayers, and Lent,
And in thy widowhood repent.
