SCENE:  THE WILDERNESS OF KENTUCKY.  TIME, MORNING.

Night far to westward mov'd her silent way,
And rising glory blaz'd in early day;
When from an hill, whose lofty head supplied
Extent of vision, (by the plain denied)
The wandering Vernon paus'd, awhile to trace
The devious journey of the daily chace.
His belt, a shot and powder-flask contain'd,
His leaning arm a rifle piece sustain'd;
His hat, which screen'd from scorching sun his head,
From black, was died by various seasons red.

Ethereal rose the breath of night around,
Or hung in brilliant spangles o'er the ground,
Engreen'd the foliage with a fresher hue,
And steep'd the pea-vines in a pearly dew.
The gaudy tulip arching o'er his head,
In lofty grandeur various blossoms spread.
The waving maple sugar'd sweets distill'd,
Such sweets as canes in Indian climates yield.
On hickory boughs the mocking warbler play'd,
For ever changing as he careless stray'd:
The larks loud chorus first he nobly tried,
The thrush, the plover, each in turn he vied.
The humming bird, in gold-shot plumage dress'd,
In busy fluttering, humble joy express'd,
O'er tufted cotton wav'd its downy way,
Or paus'd, in woodbine flowers awhile to play.

Immense, behind, submerg'd in clouds of blue,
The Appalachians rose sublime in view:
Sublime in awful height, aloft they rear'd
Their frowning heads, and in mid-heaven appear'd.
Here Vernon stood.  While far as sight could bound,
A verdant ocean undulated round;
And where the sky seem'd rising from the plain,
A silver river held its watery reign;
In each translucence, grandly roll'd along,
Its tribute echo, and a sylvan song.
Here old Arcadia seem'd again to bloom,
And pas'tral fragrance shed a rich perfume.
Here unseen spirits might delighted rove
By secret waters in the twilight grove,
Or o'er the sward, for ever green and gay,
Disporting frolic in the sun-beam's ray;
Sleep amidst flowers or by the soft cascade,
Breathe themes of love, to charm some list'ning maid.
All nature smil'd, for man, destructive man,
His devastations had not yet began.

A struggling sigh escap'd the wanderer's breast,
As thus he gaz'd, and thus his thoughts exprest.
"Rise, rise ye hills, in tenfold horror rise:
Uplift your summits to the boundless skies:
Bar man for ever from these realms of peace,
Where silence dwells, where nature smiles increase:
No &mdash; rather hold asylum to distress
And in your secret shades the vagrant bless.
Ye solemn woods, with living verdure deck'd,
The flying stranger in your arms protect;
From hostile climes, where want oppressive reigns,
He seeks compassion in your kindred plains."

"Here in the wild, what people yet unborn,
With towns and temples shall these lands adorn;
Where brakes and thickets lodge the crested snake,
Exulting cities into being wake.
Another Athens, and another Rome,
Shall rear the column, and exalt the dome;
The arts again in deserts shall resound,
And commerce spread her ample stores around.
But ah!  this vision must progressive fade;
Ambition, pride, and avarice shall invade.
For earth nor knows throughout her varied clime,
Repose or peace within the lapse of time.
These plains shall smoke, empurpl'd deep with gore,
Virgins shall weep, and murder'd youth deplore;
These lands with human carnage shall be fed,
Matrons shall wail and mingle with the dead:
Devouring flames the crashing towns destroy,
And mad, impassioned man shall leap for joy.

"Why then," he cried, "do I thus idly roam,
Forlorn and useless from a peaceful home?
Since want and misery thro' this mortal state,
Attend our footsteps with malignant hate.
Why for my sport lay low the bounding deer;
Why check the painted plover's glad career?
Why not return to share the envy'd lot
Of love and plenty in the sacred cot?
It may be now, while careless here I stray,
Unpitying Indians drag my sons away;
Perhaps my cottage feeds the rising fire,
Perhaps in flames my tender love's expire!
Ah me!  what if within the matted break,
I rouse the anger of the rat'ling snake?
What if in ambush roaming Indians lie,
Alone, unnoticed, in the wild I die:
Or lost in wildering mazes, I may tread
The haunts where Famine rears her pallid head."

Chill'd with cool horror, silent and aghast,
His pensive eye the howling wind repass'd.
Domestic pleasures each successive rise,
And tears pathetic trickle from his eyes.
"This hour shall mark my undelay'd return,
And ye, my wife, my babes, no more shall mourn,"
He said &mdash; when rushing sounds attract his ear,
Before him fleetly dash'd a bounding deer.
His flushing blood beat quicker at the sight,
The joyful chase demanded all his might:
He sprang exultant thro' the opening glade,
Pursued with ardour midst the deepest shade.
The flying deer thro' thickets tore his way,
Urg'd thro' the gloom, and left behind the day;
The doubl'ing lab'rinths trod with burning feet:
Than sound more swift, than driving winds more fleet.
The hunter onward, rapid, rapid bore,
The closing boughs distain'd his face with gore;
The sward scarce felt him as he forward flew,
The ground receding press'd him to pursue;
Now seen, now lost, mov'd on the panting foe,
The panting hunter's steps became more slow.
Involv'd and tangl'd in a brake of cane,
Pursuit was over, for pursuit was vain.
Restrain'd by meshes interwove with briar,
He chafes in vain, in vain consumes his fire;
His foe escap'd, himself a prisoner bound,
He move reluctant o'er the matted ground.
Impervious brakes appear on every side,
Intangled canes his utmost force deride.
The glad'ning sun had hasten'd down the sky,
The moon unseen had hung her orb on high.
Night in his garment, sable, blank, and drear,
No ray supplied the wand'rer's steps to cheer:
A gloom darkness wove amongst the trees,
And horror chilly crept along the breeze.
Cold, hungry, tir'd, despair benumbing ran
Thro' all his veins &mdash; when thus the angry man:
"Why!  Why," he cried, "does heaven malignant throw
Its furiate shafts on grov'ling man below?
Why form a being ever prone to wrong,
Whose lengthen'd life his sufferings but prolong?
Strike here ye fates!  pour down your tardy death,
Resume my life, and take my weary breath.
Is there a man who breathes this baleful earth,
Who feels not varied sorrows from his birth?
Is there a wretch beneath th' inclement sky,
Whose better portion would not be to die?"

While thus he spoke amidst the shades of night,
A wav'ring blaze burst on his eager sight;
A rising fire by Indian warriors pil'd,
Shed glad refulgence thro' the dreary wild;
Around they smok'd, in ghastly order spread,
A skin their garment, and the grass their bed.
A female pris'ner, with a bandage tied,
Sat near &mdash; two children weeping by her side.
With cautious pace the trembling Vernon mov'd,
For latent death a cautious pace behov'd.
In foliage hid &mdash; his shrinking senses know
His wife, his children, sad compeers in woe,
He rears his rifle &mdash; strait the unerring ball
Bids death in darkness on the nearest fall.
Again prepar'd, the shot in thunder flies,
A second hero, gasping, pants and dies.
A third receiv'd the vengeance in his breast,
And fright, and fear, and horror seiz'd the rest.
A whist'ling bullet random rush'd along,
And smarting wounds pursued the flying throng.

His wife unbound &mdash; his children round him press'd
His wife, his children, were by turns caress'd.
"No more," he cried, "in search of danger I
Will tempt the forest, or new regions try;
Could I require from heav'n's protecting care,
That safety which my hand was form'd to bear?
Ah me!  I see that man alone is blind,
By Heav'n directed with affection kind.
Like me, mankind from truth and virtue stray,
And leave their better part to vice a prey:
Resolv'd to turn, temptation leaps before,
The heart bounds on, and judgment is no more:
When caught in toils that closely press, we cry
To Heav'n for help, or Providence deny.
But even then, when hope nor help is near,
Benignant mercy may our anguish hear,
From present ill eventual good provide,
To all who in the guardian care confide,
Then come my spouse &mdash; proceed my children dear,
And home once more with sheltering roof shall cheer."
He said, and onward thro' the tangled road
They joyous mov'd to find their lov'd abode.
