SCENE:  AN AMERICAN LOG HOUSE, WITH A LITTLE PLANTATION.  TIME, SUN-SET.

The evening airs in southern breezes play'd,
Amongst the maples, thro' the forest's shade.
O'er leaves of aspin trembling seem'd to sigh,
Or lost in sweets, on fragrant peaches lie&mdash;
The sun unsullied mov'd to ocean's bed
The chirping birds hung down the weary head:
All nature tranquil breath'd serene repose,
Sublimely silent at the evening's close.

A lonely cot uprear'd its humble head;
Around, an orchard various fruitage spread.
A simple plat (with herbs and roots supplied)
Slop'd gently bending to a river's side.
A cultur'd field, unhedg'd by ragged thorn,
Bloom'd rich with variegated Indian corn:
Calm silence reign'd at evening's peaceful hour,
Mild was her reign, and gentle was her pow'r:
When on a spangled green with violets gay,
A planter sat, to see his children play:
Till tired with sport, they round their parents move
To ask caresses, or new gifts of love;
When thus the planter, on a turf-rais'd seat,
Lean'd on his wife, and kiss'd his children sweet.

"My sons," said he, "your father's voice attend,
My voice, the council of a faithful friend&mdash;
Beyond these woods, which sweep the flying clouds,
Whose wide-spread arms our humble cot enshrouds:
Beyond these woods, which with creation rose,
A mighty water everlasting flows:
A lake of waves thought scarce can traverse o'er,
Land links to Land, and fastens shore to shore.
There storms and tempests lash the sounding main,
The shuddering shores their fury scarce sustain:
Billows rough, boiling, rude as mountains hurl'd,
Shake the foundations of the frighted world.
Beyond the ocean other countries lay,
Where arts and commerce shine in bright display,
Where cities rise midst luxury and ease,
And pamper'd folly riots in disease.
There selfish men arrest the bounteous store,
Given by high Heaven alike to rich and poor.
Self-interest rules &mdash; self interest each divides,
Burns in the soul, and in the heart resides.
Friendship, and love, and all domestic ties
Shrink from the towns, and to the country flies;
Mingled with pomp, pale misery appears,
And weeping virtue drinks down silent tears.
The dawning youth exulting in his power,
Heeds not the gulph, wide opening to devour;
Feels not the sting, which pleasures leave behind,
When virtue fails to influence the mind.
The maid whose virgin charms might touch the heart,
Enkindle love, and noble thoughts impart,
Impel to deeds of more than mortal mould,
Moves not the feelings if undeck'd with gold:
Or if she shines in beauty fair and bright
She shines alone the ruffian to invite.
Cut down in early youth, n o hand to save
She sinks a sorrowing victim to the grave."

"There men on men, on nations, nations prey,
In mad rebellion, brothers, brothers slay.
Loud-sounding knaves, in freedom's sacred name,
Engender strife, and set the world in flame:
Self-tutor'd censors mock religion's rod,
Bend down to nature, scoff at nature's God."

"There, for less hire than vagrant reapers know,
Man destroys man, an undistinguished foe.
The weeping mother sees her children die,
And bleeding virgins join the general cry.
Rude slaughter strides thro' countries red with gore,
And lisping infants learn to lisp no more.
The lordly domes, religion's sacred fanes,
Swell the dark flame that rolls along the plains.
Resounding arms harsh mingle in the air;
Arts, science, learning, general ruin share,
Yet &mdash; yet, my sons, should foreign foes invade,
Protect your partners in your humble shade.
When the shrill trump sounds in your country's cause
Defend your homes, your children, and your laws:
Rush to the fight, and dare the generous strife,
Nor yield the contest but with yielding life."

"But O my darlings, whatso'er betide,
Lend not a listening ear to flattering pride:
Tempt not the height where giddy breezes play,
Deep, wide destruction spreads beneath the way.
For you is spread profusely nature's store,
Reason with prudence can require no more.
The gem that sparkles in the blaze of day,
In sick'ning mines emits no lust'rous ray;
The silken robe that flowing gay appears,
Is oft times watered with the workman's tears."

"Here, bless'd by love, beneath the blushing vine,
A blooming offspring shall around you twine.
Your daughters fair, pure as unsullied snow,
Like opening flowers shall blossom where they grow.
No blighting wind of lust or wealth shall tear,
Or strew their beauties in the barren air.
Beneath the peach-trees shall their children play,
And teeming harvest every toil repay.
When tranquil ev'ning tempts your souls to rest,
A pleasing calmness shall o'erspread your breast;
As yonder sun declining to the wave,
Shall you serene move onward to the grave;
Your children's children shall around you lay,
Till time shall rise in sempeternal day."

"The parting wave which from the ocean strays,
Engreens the mountains, thro' the vallies plays,
Midst banks of flowers, where nature sheds her sweets,
And pensive silence from the world retreats,
Then with some river, rapid, rough, and strong,
Confluent rolls its deepening course along;
Or gently winding, into calm subsides,
Where some fair garden drinks the dimp'ling tides,
Here close imprison'd in a marble pool,
(Where modest nymphs the summer heats may cool)
It shines a fountain &mdash; lost in airy play,
Whose drops prismatic gems and tints display.
But still it murmurs, still it sad complains,
Thro' verdant meadows, or thro' sterile plains:
The sea alone, from whence at first it rose,
Can lull those murmurs into still repose.
The mighty ocean spreads a boundless deep,
Where all its wanderings and its cares may sleep."

He ceas'd &mdash; the nightingale took up the strain,
And softly plaintive, pour'd a lov'd complain;
The fire fly glitter'd thro' the foliage green:
With streaming lustre sparkling o'er the scene.
The pious parents then their voices raise;
Their lovely children join the song of praise;
Such as was heard at evening's sacred hour,
Ere guilt was known in paracidial bow'r.
