Where yon grass waves o'er the silent way,
And thriving weeds their branching arms display,
Beneath the lofty maple's darkening shade
Erst stood a dome of firmest pine-planks made,
To beechen posts the obedient ends were joined,
The flowery creeper all yon side entwined,
O'er half the fabric, were there seen to rise
An angled rood ascending towards the skies;
Oft on yon wall I've ponder'd as I view'd
The hungry inmates, there enjoy their food;
Heard the sow grunt, the barrow feebly whine,
While their shrill treble all the sucklings join;
When fill'd with food, how oft I've seen them lay,
Bask in the sun and catch his warming ray.
Then, if perchance as snoring loud they laid,
They heard approach the sty the kitchen maid,
Heard on the Trough the well known swill-pail sound,
Or the thick ears of corn fly rattling round;
How quick they started &mdash; oft I pondered then,
And oft compared the ways of hogs to men.
So the dull Democrat, his dosing keeps,
And till the loaves and fishes call him, sleeps;
But when he hears approach the long wish'd prize
To the full trough of offices he flies;
Though thousand offices the fool should clog
Still as insatiate as the ravening hog.
There, oft the swinish brood in gambols gay,
Sported the day and slept the night away.
Now all these joys are fled, as late I view'd
The site where once the cumbrous hog-pen stood;
No boar I saw his greedy jaws extend,
No parent sow, her infant pigs defend,
No squeaking pigs with pious whine implore
Their mother sow to yield her milky store;
Thither no more a summer's parting day
Shall the blythe house-maid wind her devious way;
No more the swine rear'd on their legs shall stand,
And ask the flowing beverage from her hand;
No more express their squealing rapture when
Loaded with corn the farmer seeks their pen,
Or when Aurora's crimson light appears,
No more shall whine their matins in our ears.
O Idleness, in thee the cause we trace
Of all the silent sadness of this place;
For had the farmer's yard with wood been stored,
The Sty had stood, and there pigs still had snored.
It was a winter's day, "fast fell the snow,"
And bleakly round the borean blast did blow,
When the stern farmer, so the fates ordain,
Doomed the warm pen no longer should remain,
Doomed the dry planks his kitchen fires should grace,
And the oak trough supply the back-log's place;
The swine astonished heard their cheerless fate,
And deep despair in every visage sate.
And first the good old Boar prepared to go,
Leave the warm sty for heaps of drifted snow;
He marched in virtue bold with solemn pace,
While the big tears bedew'd his manly face;
Not for himself he wept, the whining train
Of infant followers, call'd his tears amain.
The Sow in louder plaints expressed her woes,
With sullen grunt the mournful barrow goes;
Yet oft he pauzed and looked with wishful eye,
At the lone hog's trough and deserted sty:
The group of pigs, groped onward, far behind,
And squeaked their anguish to the sighing wind.
Now the rank hog-weed, shades the dark'ned ground,
And baleful night-shade spreads its vines around.
CETERA DESUNT.
