Sad Muse of Sympathy, invok'd by GRAY,
To notes of woe, attune my tear-wet lyre,
That in wild strains commemorates the day,
When dust receiv'd thy plaintive Poet's Sire.

Beneath this heap, whose long rank grass is mov'd
By the chill gales, that o'er it softly sigh;
He lies, who justly liv'd, mild mercy lov'd,
And humbly walk'd with GOD, his friend on high.

The mortal lives not, who of wrong accus'd
His honest heart, that knew nor guile, nor dread,
Clos'd is his hand that ne'er relief refus'd,
And mute his tongue that slander never spread.

Of Liberty and Peace, a friend sincere,
Their smiles rejoic'd him, their decline he mourn'd
Pure truth he sought for, led by reason clear,
And priz'd Religion, while he Priest-craft spurn'd.

In youth, observing wisdom's lore sublime,
He shun'd intemp'rance, crime of thoughtless man,
Hence, active still, he reach'd the verge of time,
Beneath the load of threescore years and ten.

The gravity of age, the sullen gloom
Of superstition, ne'er his mind oppress'd;
He kept the Christian course to Heav'n, his home,
Delighted with the road that lead to rest.

Time can't restore my loss &mdash; yon leafless tree,
By nature grac'd will soon its green boughs wave;
Yon roofless temple, scatter'd o'er the lea,
Repair'd by art, may shield an audience grave.

But all the pow'rs of nature, and of art,
Tho' kings should supplicate, and not a swain,
Can't give sensations to the pulseless heart
That here reposes ne'er to throb again.

Sad muse of Sympathy, forsake me not!
Console this breast that long has friendless been,
When solitude's drear gloom o'ercast my cot,
And fond affection wakes remembrance keen.

Sev'n times in snow hath Winter wrapt the plain,
Since fate my first, best friend, to Heav'n call'd home;
Thrice bless'd was he, who shun'd the scene of pain
And penury, that shortly was to come.

Strife in the city rear'd his hydra head;
Lank-sided Famine stalk'd the steril plain;
The sad survivors ask'd in vain for bread,
And envied them who by the sword were slain.

Hath fate, that pain'd my country, smil'd on me?
No!  danger and distress, I too have met;
The proud man's scorn &mdash; the false man's calumny,
Have griev'd me often and may grief me yet.

But let me imitate his noble mind,
Whose virtues dignified life's humble sphere;
Prize right and truth &mdash; my country, and mankind&mdash;
Forgive me foes, and to my friends adhere.

So, when the village swain shall hither bring
My sable bier, and wrap my limbs in clay,
Some rustic Bard my doleful dirge may sing,
And Heav'n call home my soul to endless day.
