SCENE &mdash; A MOUNTAIN NEAR BAGDAD.
TIME &mdash; SUNSET.

Long had young Sadi (fairest of the swains
Who guard their snowy flocks on Georgia's plains)
Endur'd Zamira's scorn, and proud disdain;
Till, lost to hope, he sought a distant plain;
Urg'd by despair, his faithless love he flies,
Till Bagdad's turrets glitter in his eyes&mdash;
Blue was the shepherd's robe which flow'd around
His tender limbs; its folds a girdle bound:
His auburn locks a snow-white scarf confin'd,
Whose ends behind him floated with the wind:
His languid eyes no more those charms display'd,
Which once had fix'd with love each Georgian maid;
All but the fair whose cruel charms possest,
Ah, luckless Sadi!  thy too tender breast:
No more his pallid cheeks with pleasure glow
But, sad, assum'd the livery of woe.

As now the setting sun forsook the day,
Slow, by the fields of rice he beat his way
To where the cedars on the mountain's side,
With mournful shade o'erhung Euphrates' tide;
There to the plains and waving woods, alone,
The hapless shepherd pour'd his tender moan;
Stretch'd on a rock whose bow o'erhung the stream,
Thus, bath'd in tears, he mourn'd his slighted flame:&mdash;

"Thou, Sun, whose orb, now sinking from the eye,
With placid lustre gilds the western sky!
Say, as in Orient pomp you led the day,
Or shed in raging noon thy sultry ray;
Or, as thy beams, o'er the illumin'd plain,
Dart their last glories on thy Persian fane;
Have they a shepherd more forlorn espy'd,
Than he who now bewails Zamira's pride?

"And thou, canst thou forget, ah faithless maid!
Thy plighted vows beneath the palm-tree's shade,
As from the mid-day heat we sought the grove,
Whilst mutual transports spoke a mutual love,
You fondly swore, by yon bright source of day,
No other love should o'er thy bosom sway?
Yet, when your sheep had from the pasture stray'd,
And sought the coolness of a neighbouring glade,
Quick as the darting of the solar ray,
O'er threat'ning steeps I urg'd my rapid way,
(My flock abandoned on the open plain)
And brought the wandrers to their folds again:
Then, as to thy lov'd presence I drew nigh,
(Whilst cold disdain averts thy alter'd eye)
Your thanks, indeed, you to my ears address'd,
But banish'd joy for ever from my breast;
Whilst curst Alcanzer, by Zamira's side,
Address'd, in whispering sighs, his future bride.
Stung at the sight, my rage refus'd controul;
Despair and hope by turns possess'd my soul;
Till thou, at length, thy alter'd love confess'd
And bar'd the falsehood of thy perjur'd breast!
Now to my native plains I bid adieu!
I fly myself, a faithless world, and &mdash; you!
Seek out the deep'ning shade, and, taught by grief,
Invoke the hand of death, the wretch's last relief!

"Let Nature now her utmost rage display;
Let clouds and storms obscure the cheerful day!
Let falling showers no more their influence shed,
Whilst draught and famine o'er each valley spread;
Let yon bright sun no more those skies adorn
Since Sadi feels the proud Zamira's scorn!

"Yet think not thou, fond youth!  whose lawless gaze
Zamira's beauties with delight surveys,
Think not I'll tamely bear the galling sight,
Or stand obsequious at thy marriage rite!
No &mdash; to the shades the fawning priest I'll send,
From thy soft hand the bridal crown I'll rend,
I'll dash the blazing altar to the ground,
And bid the rolling flames the pile surround;
Then, joyful, on the smoking wreck I'll throw
This loathsome weight, and end my life and woe!"

Thus to the moss-grown rocks, and waving wood,
Whose gloomy shade stretch'd o'er the sounding flood,
The frantic Sadi mourn'd, till dewy night
Advancing, stole each object from the sight.
