In yonder cave where bloated lizards crawl,
And slimy snails hang matted on the wall;
Where chilling damp in humid clusters weeps,
And rankling ivy o'er the arches creeps;
Where screaming owls and night's black ravens sit,
And cloister'd bats around the ruins flit;
Where gliding phantoms hold their mystick spell,
And mumbling witches chaunt their midnight yell,&mdash;
Immur'd forlorn amid the mould'ring cells,
The pallid victim of distraction dwells.
Each with'ring look and furious eyeball's glow
Mark the deep traces of consuming woe.
Lo!  the sunk cheek, the ghastly face, behold!
View the sad remnants of the fairest mould.
Those clotted locks that hang disorder'd round,
In circling curls his manly temples bound;
In him united once the graces shone,
And expectation mark'd him for her own.&mdash;
Soon travel, want, and cold neglect and care,
Penance and pain, disease and fierce despair,
In dread succession follow'd close behind,
Nor left one vestige of the former mind!
'Twas thus her snare alluring Beauty spread,
And wove her garlands round his captive head.
Perfumed groves her honey paths unfold,
With spring's fresh blossoms and with autumn's gold;
Love's liquid strains responsive stole along,
In fainting cadence breath'd the mellow song;
"Ah!  cruel youth," they said, or seemed to say,
"Unheeding thus, why pass my roseate way;
Why silent thus neglect my secret bow'rs
My cooling grottos and my fragrant flow'rs,
My nodding orchards and my nectar rills,
My crystal fountains and my fruitful hills?
Ah cruel youth!  restrain thy thoughtless haste,
Yet deign one sip from amber rills to taste;
Yet deign one primrose from my shade to take,
'Tis beauty asks, and 'tis for Beauty's sake!"&mdash;
Th' enchantress ceasing, wav'd her golden hair,
Ten thousand odours caught the yielding air.
As thro' the glades the soft-ton'd murmur flow'd,
Each floweret open'd and each blossom glow'd.&mdash;
The dulcet notes on spicy pinions glide,
Now lure the captive, and now seem to chide;
Now check his steps, but checking reinspire,
And, adding fuel, feed each latent fire.&mdash;
Thus currents, pented by some sudden stay,
Confine their waters, and impede their way;
But, scope regaining, rush with double force,
Receive fresh ardour and impel their course.&mdash;
O, when the slave is thoughtless led in charms,
In silken chains is bound in Beauty's arms;
Adown the hill of fond delusion led,
On roses sleeping and on fragrance fed;
Like insects sporting in the summer's ray,
In dreams of rapture melt the scene away:&mdash;
Here step by step in devious mazes tost,
His honour sullied and his virtue lost!
Crime after crime await the prostrate soul,
'Till one great mischief swallows up the whole!&mdash;
O Lyre awake!  and thrill my dying verse,
Portray each horror and each flight rehearse!
Unfold the visions of the frantick mind,
Ride the dark wave and mount the viewless wind!
Speed through the storm where angry breakers rise,
And arrowy tempests flame the wrathful skies.&mdash;
Led by thy touch, transport from glooms of night,
To lands of magick and to realms of light;
Where spring congenial crowns the verdant clime,
And smiles exalting in eternal prime.&mdash;
Oft when the fiend the maniack spirit wakes,
And on the slumbers of its vision breaks;
Aghast and wild along the desart raves,
The thunder threatens and the conflict braves.
Courts the bleak beach where howling tempests roar,
And foaming billows lash the sounding shore.
The struggling pris'ner, lost in eddying maze,
Now thrills in ice, now melts in liquid blaze;
Now mounts the air, now dives the craggy steep,
And flits the regions of the gloomy deep.
Here holds strange converse in the realms below,
And greets each shadow as it passes thro'.&mdash;
On the swift wings of transient visions led,
Alternate phantoms to his fancy spread;
Now thro' the paths of flow'ry groves he strays,
Each nymph attendant on his footsteps plays;
Nectarious streams redundant flow along,
And chorals chaunt him with their tender song.
Soft on the ear the melting warble floats,
The lutes responsive catch the magick notes.
The wondrous sounds like David's harp of old
Purge the black fiend and break his mystick hold.
Thro' fancy's eye aray'd in varied charms,
Luxuriant Beauty spreads her silken arms.
Unrival'd here, transporting graces bloom,
And nature op'ning breathes her fresh perfume:
Rich clust'ring vines mid autumn's golden bow'rs,
Unite their juices with the woobine flow'rs,
Hills, woods, and plains in joyous union ring,
And glow extatick in unceasing spring!
To pluck the sweets with longing hand he tries,
But ah!  each tempter from his touching flies;
Again he grasps to fold the luring fair,
Yet still he grasps a phantom of the air.
Thus the doom'd wretch in parching fever stood,
Above his neck amid the copious flood,
In vain desir'd the tempting stream to lave,
In vain implor'd the tantalizing wave;
Still on it roll'd and swell'd, th' enticing pool,
Nor gave one drop his burning tongue to cool!&mdash;
The maniack raving with distraction's ire,
His bosom heaving and his eyes on fire;
Grasps the frail phantoms as they glide away,
In shadows vanish and in gleams decay.
Now distant murmurs strike the list'ning ear,
Promiscuous blasts in fitful streams appear;
Commingling thunders fierce contending rise,
And mission'd lightings heat the wrathful skies.
Swift thro' the gloom, that cloaks the marly bog,
Dart the grim secrets of the stifling fog,
Black from the caverns of all-mantling night,
Burst the dun spectres on the startled sight.
The smiling mask that treach'rous Beauty wears,
Commanding Justice from her visage tears.
Conceal'd beneath Medusa's front appears,
His hundred heads the venom'd Hydra rears.
Here baleful Envy shakes her snaky hair,
Close stalks behind the ghastly fiend Despair.
With creeping flesh wild Horror shrieking stood,
With ragged locks uprear'd, and frozen blood.
Next red Revenge, with nostrils spread broad,
And threatning brand with fated victims gor'd,
Grinding his teeth, his eyeballs black with fire,
Startling with frenzy and convuls'd with ire.
Then pale Remorse, with measured step, and slow,
With brow of anguish and with soul of woe,
His heart's best blood the gnawing vultures prey,
And serpents hissing throng the dreary way.
Then tott'ring came Disease, wasted and grim,
With ling'ring pace and paralytic limb;
Meagre and lean his foetid form decay'd;
A haggard phantom and a goblin shade;&mdash;
From his foul nostrils fum'd the putrid breath,
Rank with contagion and surcharg'd with death;
Whilst from his mouth the clammy mucus roll'd,
Alive with vermin and with nausea foul'd.
Now Suicide, the biform'd hag, was seen,
With rusted dagger and with famish'd mein;
A glass she bore, which oft, with frantick glance,
With rolling eye and stealing look askance,
Its face she sought, yet still with frenzied view
Reverted oft and back with terrour drew.
Grim Slaughter furious drives her ebon car,
And waves her ensigns o'er the wrecks of war;
Whilst Carnage smiling stalks o'er mangled bones,
And ghastly joyous, lists the dying groans.
Here Rapine fell erects his scaly crest,
And Plunder, scowling, grins upon his breast.
High o'er the van Alecto's wild fire gleams,
Hurls her red torches and her blazing streams;
Outnumb'ring fiends in wild succession tear,
Fierce tumult shaking from their horrent hair,
And breathing plagues torment the smould'ring air.
On sulph'rous waves, the ugly Harpies ride,
Begirt with storms the lava billows stride
And whelming chaos rules the troubled tide&mdash;
Starting aghast the shiv'ring maniack stares,
Whilst round his head conflicting tumult glares.
His hair uprearing in disorder flies,
And scalding tears burst hopeless from his eyes;
Along the waste in furious transport raves,
The shout prolonging echoes thro' the caves;
Now sudden halts, in death-like silence stands,
Rooted his feet and clench'd his quiv'ring hands;
Now frantick laughs and with convulsive cries,
His piercing voice despair's wild energies,
Thus dares the Daemons and the host defies.
"Hell breathing fiends!" the feverish wretch exclaims,
"Discharge your tortures and consume your flames:
Hurl your red bolts, your hissing serpents fling,
Arm'd with strange horrors and the smarting sting,
Tear the strong pillars of the arched sky,
Each mountain root and burn old ocean dry;
Lay waste creation and let chaos come,
To shake her ashes and confirm her doom;
Myself, secure amid your blazing war,
Will laugh to scorn your elemental jar,
Behold!  the seas and rolling waves divide,
And ope the flood-gates of their mystick tide.
Conceal'd beneath I trace my guardian road,
Amid the chambers of the secret flood,
Not far beyond the shining palace stands,
Not seen by mortals and not made by hands,
Whose golden portals, dazzling far and wide,
Invite the pilgrim from on ev'ry side;
Thro' the bright paths the blissful land is seen,
With autumn's fruits and spring's eternal green:
There vital suns with genial splendours blaze,
And life and light spring mutual from their rays,
There the bright chorus tune the living lyre,
Wake to bold numbers and the saints inspire;
Myriads uncarnate with incessant praise
Their incense offer and their voices raise;
Legions innumber'd, countless seraphim,
Unceasing render and uniting hymn.
Already now methinks their strains I join,
Their choirs harmonick and their songs divine.
Flow swift, ye streams!  urge on your wat'ry way;
Ye currents speed!  revive your dull delay,
I plunge my passage to immortal day."&mdash;
Then headlong leaping from the rugged steep,
The waves receive him in their silent deep!&mdash;
As by the floods the sportive Sea-Nymphs glide,
And gently floating skim the trembling tide,
Their sounding shells in varying numbers flow,
Now weep in anguish, now in madness glow,
Now hollow sounds in doles of deep despair,
Despondent mingling steals upon the air,
The sighs, slow dying in a tender tone,
In murm'ring accents sink a fainting moan,
Lull'd in deep sleep the drooping chords decay,
In soft vibration melting, die away!
Now sudden bursting from the lifeless lyre,
The nerve of rapture and the soul of fire,
Rocks, shores and woods with loud succession ring,
And transport leaping starts from ev'ry string.
Thus the wild minstrels of the mystick shell,
Wake the sad numbers of their fountain-knell;
And should the whirlwinds o'er the waters sweep,
Their rage command, and make the furies sleep,
The surges check, and bid the torrents roar
And break their billows on a distant shore.
For here the Zephyrs and the streams repose,
Here thoughtful silence broods her pensive woes,
The willows here their languid branches bend,
And round the brink their emblem shades extend;&mdash;
Here o'er pale Grief the dismal cypress spreads
Her sombre brows, and night-contagion spreads,
Here Sorrow ling'ring marks the eve-star beam,
The glow-worm twinkle and the silv'ry stream:
Here dew-drench'd garlands weeping Naiades lave,
Their tributes bathing in each refluent wave,
That, lightly passing, skim the wat'ry grave.
