TIME, AFTERNOON.
REUBEN, ROGER.

REUBEN.
What long procession, wrapt in weeds of woe,
Thro' yonder willowy passage seems to go?
Pausing, the ground with mournful steps they tread,
And winding, seek the city of the dead.
But hark!  the village bell's depressing toll,
Speaks the departure of some wretched soul.
Say, Roger, when that parting spirit flew?
What caus'd its flight?  Its helpless owner, who?
A foe or stranger, on the sable bier,
From foes and strangers might demand a tear.

ROGER.
The fair Clarinda, fill'd with every grace,
Benign of heart, and beautiful of face,
Snatch'd in the morning of her opening bloom,
Is borne by that procession to the tomb.

REUBEN.
Alas!  on such a form could sickness seize;
So young, so innocent, so form'd to please?
Must youth depart?  Must wise Clarinda die?
O did her morning only dawn to fade?
Had heav'n no mercy on a matchless maid?

ROGER.
Shepherd, forbear, the ways of heaven are just;
Afflicted mortals should believe, and trust.
By a wise hand the universe is sway'd,
Which justly limits every life it made.
God gave, and God has quench'd the vital flame;
Let weeping mortals bless his holy name.

REUBEN.
Yet tears to fallen worth are surely due;
My tears, Clarinda, shall be paid to you.
Come shepherds, come, who mourn her sudden doom,
And strew the new-born roses round her tomb.
There let the breezes all their richness bring;
There cluster all the garlands of the Spring.

ROGER.
Delusive wish!  the spirit fled away,
The tomb envelopes only senseless clay;
The roses scattered there must quickly fade,
But blooms immortal deck the glorious maid;
The trifling rites we pay, she heeds no more,
But sings where angels tremble and adore.

REUBEN.
Religion, Roger, foe to rural glee,
Is warmly prized by you, but not by me;
It chills when gay, it scares my soul when brave,
More grim than death, more dreadful than the grave.
Far from my cottage be its influence shed,
Nor croak its midnight ravens round my head.

ROGER.
What is religion but a precious pain?
A transient loss, which proves eternal gain?
A secret path, by vagrants never trod;
Peace with mankind, with conscience, and with God;
A tear excited by remembered sin;
A smile from Jesus, which no worlds could win;
A gem, a golden crown, a deathless prize;
Sweet hope on earth and triumph in the skies.

REUBEN.
Yes, these are things which all believers tell;
Dreams which, when learnt, can be repeated well.
Heaven, in religion's form, ye seem to see,
But your religion brings no heaven to me:&mdash;
In charnels pale, where bending arches shed
Eternal midnight round the putrid dead,
I see her stand:  her bosom heav'd with sighs,
The tears forever streaming from her eyes,
The world secluded from her dark retreat,
And all its pleasures murdered at her feet.

ROGER.
But, Reuben, is this dreadful phantom true?
Is piety in fault, my friend, or you?
Celestial comforts on her golden wing;
See mercy (pleading with a God unknown,)
Sprinkle with calming blood the burning throne!
See faith in awful majesty arise,
And rend in twain the curtain of the skies!
See justice lay the sword and balance by;
See guilty wretches not afraid to die!
Religion, terrors only can impart
To a bad mind, and a perverted heart.

REUBEN.
O Roger, teach me by some skill to find
This inward peace &mdash; this summer of the mind;
Ere yet my hold on things terrestrial cease,
Point a poor vagrant to the paths of peace.

ROGER.
The art of bliss, when fully understood,
Is simply this &mdash; Embrace the truth; do good;
From gluttony, from bowls that that fire the brain,
From smiles of harlots and their snares abstain;
Be mild to others &mdash; to yourself severe;
And drop o'er errors past a humble tear;
With frugal kindness let your gains be spent;
And when you can't be happy, be content;
Be never idle; be of pride afraid;
Be generous only when your debts are paid;
Mark well the bounds where sin and duty join,
And never pass that most important line;
Sin is an icy mountain's slippery side,
He strikes the bosom, who begins to slide;
From each vain refuge to the cross be driven;
Forgive your foes, and be by God forgiven;&mdash;
In heart and life let these fair precepts shine,
Life, death, hope, peace, all earth and heaven are thine.
