Oh thou, sweet Bard of Memory's magic powers!
Whose tuneful page can charm life's cheerless hours;
From the sad heart can steal its present wo,
Bid it with blissful recollection glow.
And thou, enchanting Bard!  whose youthful lays
Gay Hope hath gilded with her brightest rays,
Still shall your numbers joys refin'd impart,
While memory soothes, or hope revives the heart.
But say, is Memory pleasure? &mdash; In her train
How often move remorse, regret, and pain:
And smiling as the enchantress Hope appears,
She leads along a group of trembling fears;
And oh!  how oft when darling buds just blow,
Chill sweeps the blast, and lays the promise low.
Adventurous maid!  how dar'st thou thus aspire
To touch with feeble hand a seraph's lyre?
Shrinks not thy timid youth with blushing fear
To meet the "world's dread laugh," the critic's sneer?
Why dread the critic's frown?  I ask not Fame
To wreathe her honours round my humble name;
E'en should the muse have garlands yet to spare,
I do not ask them for my auburn hair&mdash;
Still let it careless flutter o'er my breast,
Loose to the winds &mdash; unlaurell'd, and undrest.

Thou first, thou best of beings!  may thy smile
Prosper the fervent wish that prompts the toil;
Deign to pronounce the humble effort blest,
And bid thy peace illume each kindred breast.

Blasted in all thy trusting heart held dear,
Why, child of Hope, that unexpected tear?
Though hope may promise rapture's rich repast,
Say, can she promise that the scene will last?
Then why on joys so transient .place thy mind&mdash;
Joys which, at best, at death must be resigned.
In fancied bliss, why waste the fleeting day,
And muse, and dream, and hope thy life away?
Oh give me pleasures I must not resign&mdash;
Oh give me joys which ever shall be mine;
No cherish'd hope which must at last depart,
When stern Experience tears it from the heart;
No soft romantic dream which Fancy fires,
Steals the fond heart, and while it charms, expires;
The child of Hope, then frenzied with despair,
Drowns, in her tears her palaces of air.

Phantoms of bliss!  ye glittering forms!  away:
Come to my heart, thou heaven-directed, ray&mdash;
Dry every tear, bid earth-born sorrows cease,
And to the bleeding bosom whisper peace,&mdash;
Give to each painful passion that repose,
That heavenly calm RELIGION only knows.

Oh sacred power!  without thy cheering ray,
How cold our joys!  how dark our brightest day!
And when each joy departs with fleeting breath,
Alas, how dark the awful night of death!
'Tis thou alone can'st light the fearful gloom&mdash;
To shrinking nature reconcile the tomb.

Let all thy hopes, thy boundless wishes reign,
With all the transports fancy e'er could feign&mdash;
Unite them all, and be of all posest&mdash;
Now speak, ingenuous bosom, art thou blest?
Dost thou not still some unknown want deplore?
And still, insatiate, ever grasp at more?
How cold must be the heart which does not prize
The thousand blessings lavish earth supplies!
It unexhausted treasures can impart
Which win, enchant, but ne'er could fill the heart.
But should Religion her blest influence lend,
Redoubled raptures all its joys attend;
With every charm she blends a charm divine,
She can do more &mdash; can teach us to resign.
Since all must be resign'd, come heavenly power!
Whose smile can cheer the desolated hour,
To sorrow's wounds thy healing balm bestow,
And mingle nectar in the cup of wo.

See rosy youth, gay, bounding o'er the plain!
With health, grace, beauty, laughing in her train:
A thousand sportive joys around her fly,
And every hope lights up her ardent eye;
Her dreams of future years expect to prove
Unchanging friendship, everlasting love;
At each sad tale the ready tear-drops start,
Each generous action swells the enthusiast's heart:
How sweet the tear which clouds the eye awhile!
Bathes hope's bright cheek, then finishes &mdash; a smile.
How sweet the feelings noble deeds inspire!
Which burn to reach the virtues they admire:
Oh spring of life, with every transport warm,
When all is new and every scene can charm;
Era of bliss! &mdash; thy rapid flight delay;
Ye golden hours &mdash; enchanting moments, stay!
But ah!  how vain the wish!  for soon must fly
The roseate cheek, the rapture-beaming eye;
Bright tints of beauty we no longer trace,
The frolic step, or form of agile grace;
But can that fervid heart forget to glow,
And hear with apathy another's wo?
All!  shall that open brow be stamped with guile?
Or pale distrust supplant that playful smile?
Must all youth's vivid feelings be forgot?
Guardians of human bliss!  permit it not:
Time!  take thine own, bid every charm depart
From youth's sweet form, but spare the youthful heart.
Oh spare that heaven-strung lyre, with rapture stor'd;
Blunt not the music of a single chord;
Though doom'd to notes of wo, still let it own
Each soft vibration &mdash; each entrancing tone;
Still let it beat to every virtue just,
Though oft deceived, oh may it ever trust;
Let not cold interest, with his frown severe,
Chill the warm wish, or check the tender tear;
Bid friendship still with generous fervour burn,
Though unrequited friendship it must mourn.
Nor let affection from the bosom fly,
Though doom'd to heave the unregarded sigh;
Let not one bright ennobling passion cease,
Nor lose one feeling, though to purchase peace:
Oh thou, arrayed in every charm of youth!
Come with that look of innocence and truth&mdash;
Come with that glowing, tender, artless breast,
And be a SAVIOUR'S image there imprest.
Oh come, and let Religion's altar prove,
The fragrant incense of thy earliest love.
When youth's gay scenes fade fast in thoughtful years,
And sorrow bathes the faltering steps in tears&mdash;
Come then, blest power, and thy celestial art
Shall guide to heaven the disappointed heart&mdash;
Shall tell us, in those realms of love and truth
Bloom bliss eternal and immortal YOUTH.

Who would the soul in sordid wealth immerse,
Which waves may swallow, or the winds disperse?
Without the bliss of making others blest,
It gives no transports to the generous breast.
While poverty one hapless wretch destroys,
How couldst thou revel in superfluous joys?
Can the down pillow, or the velvet bed,
Give sweeter slumbers to the aching bead?
To the rack'd frame can glittering gold give ease?
Or will thy pictur'd walls exclude disease?
Can the light dance, or music's softest strain,
Bid conscience sleep, or charm to rest one pain?
Full many a robe adorn'd with jewels rare
Folds o'er a breast that heaves with anxious care:&mdash;
Full many a fair one lifts her languid eyes,
Sees all are gay, and wonders why she sighs.

Worldling!  thy joys are transitory, wild;
Oh, happier far Religion's meanest child:
Would he exchange for all thy boasted wealth,
The peaceful bosom, or the glow of health?
The grateful heart for every blessing given?
The sweet dependence on the care of heaven?&mdash;
Secure he slumbers on his lowly bed,
While howls the storm around his straw-roof'd shed.

Despond not then, ye children of his love!
Fear not one want your Father can remove;
That guardian power whose eye surrounds us all,
Who looks with pity on a sparrow's fall;
That heavenly Father, merciful and mild,
Will he forsake his own adoring child?

Or does Ambition prompt thy restless sigh?
Do fame and power attract thy soaring eye?
Say, would'st thou dare to mount a tottering throne?
Pants thy fond heart to call a world thy own?
Take History's volumes &mdash; read the annals there,
Of aching crowned heads &mdash; of "sceptred care."
To paint each mournful story to our eyes,
Would check aspiring wishes as they rise,
Arrest ambition in her mad career,
Bid envy melt in pity's softest tear.
Were thine a throne, its pleasures and its pride,
Oh yet accept this sweet, this angel guide;
Her smile would add new glories to thy crown,
And cheer thy soul, though all the world should frown.
'Twas this sustained thee in each trying scene,
And formed thy triumph, lovely martyr Queen;

It was Religion taught thy youthful heart
With life, with empire, and with love to part;
'Twas not ambition thy pure heart beguil'd;
Ah how could Mary blame the duteous child?
In wrath she hurl'd the fair usurper down,
Tore from her placid brow her transient crown;
With vengeful heart her punishment decreed,
And doom'd the sweet Philosopher to bleed:
She with calm mind received her doom unmov'd,
And suffered only in the friends she lov'd;
Her conscious soul defy'd a tyrant's frown,
Look'd to the skies, and saw a brighter crown;
She blest her murderer, raised her grateful eyes,
And fell &mdash; more nobly than the noblest rise.

But is ambition bliss, its wish possest?
Oh tell us, then, why are not heroes blest?
Say, does not Ceasar's, Alexander's fame,
Degraded, sink in Howard's nobler name?
He forg'd no chains to bind the bleeding breast,
But loos'd the chains of innocence opprest;
His generous heart for other's wrongs could feel,
And traversed the wide world those wrongs to heal;
His laurels cost no wretch his last deep sigh,
He reads his triumphs in the thankful eye;
They cost no widow's tear, no orphan's groan,
But the sweet tear of gratitude alone.
Must not these deeds a richer joy afford
Than bleeding thousands conquered by his sword?
Than burning towns, than palaces laid low,
Than shouts of victory mix'd with groans of wo?
Oh dawn, blest day!  when, savage fame resign'd,
Man lives the friend &mdash; not murderer of his kind;
When war's inhuman paths no more are trod,
And all ambition is to serve our God;
Fade blood-stained laurel!  war thy clangour cease!
Commence thy reign, oh, glorious Prince of Peace!

Or should thy heart with softer passions swell,
Cling to the friend it soon must bid farewell:
Relentless death no prayers, no vows can move,
Nor friendship's tears, nor agonies of love:
Clos'd is the eye that cheered our brightest day&mdash;
Mute the lov'd voice that charm'd our griefs away,
Cold the warm heart our blessings once could bless,
Whose sympathy made every sorrow less:
Oh what can memory from her stores supply,
To check the pang, or dry the tearful eye?
Or what can hope, with all her smiles, impart,
To soothe the anguish of the plundered heart?

How sweet this midnight scene!  the breeze that blows
Seems but to hush all nature to repose;
The full-orb'd moon, its nightly course begun,
Bright and unclouded, seems a softer sun;
See her beams glimmer where the willows wave
Their drooping foliage o'er the new-made grave!

What lovely form appears, so sad, so fair,
Her dark robes mingling with her streaming hair?
The clock tolls twelve; sweet mourner!  what has power
To break thy slumbers at this silent hour?
No sleep is broken, Emma knows no sleep,
But steals at midnight o'er the grave to weep:
See the once shrinking fair one fearless tread,
Through the long grass, and o'er the slumbering dead,
Sink on the well-known spot she came to seek,
And give the clay-cold turf her fading cheek!
No tears she sheds, but sighs of black despair
Burst from her heart, and tell the anguish there.
Two fairy forms now glide across the green,
The one with pensive, one with joyous mien:
'Tis musing Memory; gayly at her side
Moves Hope, our flatterer, our delusive guide;
Around the moonlit scene they cast their eyes,
Then bend their steps where Emma mourning lies.

"I come," said MEMORY, "to relieve thy pain,
Almost to give thee Henry, back again;
I to thy heart his image will restore&mdash;
Will count his charms, his talents, o'er and o'er;
Revive those scenes his smiles did once improve,
Speak with his voice, and look his looks of love&mdash;
Bring to thine ear his touching voice in prayer,
Which rose to heaven, and told his heart was there&mdash;
Dwell with enchanted pause on every grace,
Which once illum'd his soul-expressive face&mdash;
Recal with vivid touch those happy hours,
When in thy path love strew'd its sweetest flowers:
Thy Henry's virtues shall each thought employ,
Which form'd thy home a Paradise of Joy."

"Hence, busy Memory, from my tortur'd heart,
With all thy train of images, depart:
To me no power like thine can bring relief,
Each touch thy pencil gives, renews my grief;
Faint not those flowers that love and joy once gave,
Which, blasted, wither on my Henry's grave;
Faint not his virtues, once my fond heart's boast,
To that fond heart forever &mdash; ever lost;
Oh bid no more thy heightened picture glow,
Thou giv'st each pang unutterable wo.
Come, blest oblivion!  all my senses steep,
And lull each feeling in eternal sleep;
Oh my lost love!  revive in breathing charms,
Or lock thy Emma in thine icy arms."

The hapless fair one, wilder with despair.
Roll'd her dark eyes, and tore her silken hair;
With frantic voice her Henry's shade addrest,
Kiss'd his cold grave, and clasped it to her breast:
Then starts, her Henry's fancied voice she hears,
Faints on the turf, and bathes it with her tears;
Then smiling HOPE unveil'd her beauteous face,
That blue-ey'd charmer of the human race:
"Weep, Emma, weep," she said, "but cease to rave,
Nor strew such ringlets on the unconscious grave;
Raise from the senseless ground those charming eyes,
And view my fairy prospects round thee rise:
My richest treasures shall thy woes beguile,
The world admiring courts again thy smile;
Whole years of joy in bright succession see,
Look up, sweet maid, I promise all to thee."

"Oh flatterer!  cease, my bleeding bosom spare,
Offer no joys my Henry cannot share;
What is the world to me? &mdash; its charms are o'er,
They all expired when Henry breathed no more;
'Twas he alone could every scene endear;
Talk not of hope &mdash; my hope is buried here."

Rejected Hope then found each promise vain,
And veil'd her blushes in her azure train,
Hid her fair head among the willow boughs,
And bound the flexile foliage round her brows.
Another form now meets the raptur'd eyes,
Whose seraph mien bespeaks her native skies;
Of radiant white her robes celestial flow'd,
And heaven's own halo round her temples glow'd;
Serene, benign, her angel face exprest
The errand which her melting voice addrest.

"Is then thy hope beneath that grassy sod?
Oh, guilty mourner, hast thou left thy God?
Return return!  his word forbids despair&mdash;
Rise from that grave, thy Henry is not there;
In heaven his spirit dwells, released from pain&mdash;
And wouldst thou bring him back to earth again?&mdash;
Tear from his angel brows his heavenly crown,
And from seraphic glory drag him down?
Oh impious wish!  Oh most unhallow'd prayer!
Forgive, my God, the accents of despair!
Far from thy heart such selfish grief remove,
And bid it melt in penitence and love.
Did that great God, whom countless worlds obey,
Who fills the throne of universal sway,
To whom all nature owes her form and breath,
Descend to pain, to poverty, and death?
And shall the soul whose guilt enhanc'd his doom,
Four all its sorrows o'er a mortal's tomb?
Waste thus on earth its warmest, noblest fires,
And feel no anguish when its God expires?
Can thy hard heart forget his wondrous love,
Who left for thee his realms of bliss above?
With every earthly joy thy fond heart glow'd,
Yet quite forgot the God who all bestowed.
Still, still he loved thee, and in mercy mild
He gave the wound to bring him back his child.
'Twas mercy's self that laid thy idol low,
And dash'd thy cup with bitter drops of wo.
Come to his throne, there pour thy soul's distress,
He yet will pity, and forgive, and bless;
Come to his throne!  his spirit can impart
Celestial balm to heal the breaking heart:
And when a few short years of life are o'er,
Thy Henry thou shalt meet to part no more."
Thus spoke RELIGION:  was a heart e'er given
That would resist the eloquence of Heaven?
The mourner kneels; no more with sorrow wild&mdash;
"Receive, oh father!  thy repenting child;
Forgive the heart which fainted at thy rod,
Which mourn'd its Henry, and forgot its God;
My earthly all to thee I now resign,
Oh!  heal my bleeding heart, and make it thine.
Attendant on RELIGION, MEMORY come!
Sweet, soothing maid!  and make my breast thy home,
The countless blessings of my life recall,
And raise my heart to him who gives me all:&mdash;
Here too, sweet HOPE!  thy joyous footsteps bend,
Come, charmer, come!  and be again my friend;
Promise no transports by this poor world given,
But come, with angel smile, and talk of heaven."

When thus out earthly comforts far remove,
And the grave closes o'er the forms we love,
Religion comes to bring us sweet relief,
Soothes the sad heart, and gives a charm to grief;
Tells us a Father pities our distress,
Corrects to heal, and wounds us but to bless;
Lifts the adoring eye of faith above,
To him who loves us with a father's love.

Forc'd from his only darling child to part,
'Twas this, La Roche!  that cheer'd thy aching heart;
Thy faltering steps supported to her bier,
Mingled the christian's with the parent's tear;
Rais'd the meek eye, submissive kiss'd the rod,
And saw the father in the chastening God;
There, as he view'd thy sorrowing heart adore,
The melting sceptic wish'd to doubt no more.

Close to her heart, her only earthly joy,
The widow'd Mother clasps her beauteous boy,
With mournful pleasure views each dawning grace,
And bathes with Memory's tears his cherub face:
"Sweet face!  with all a father's beauty blest,
With every feature most beloved imprest,
My orphan babe!  no more a father's arms
Extend with rapture for thy infant charms;
Two guardian hearts thy fate did once allow&mdash;
Thy mother's breast is all thy refuge now;
In this sad breast life's flame doth dimly shine,
And shows that refuge cannot long be thine:
My wasting form bespeaks a hastening doom;
Soon I shall join thy father in the tomb.
And must I go and leave his child behind,
A friendless orphan!  to a world unkind?
Who then will watch thy steps, dispel thy fears,
Kiss from thy beauteous eyes the starting tears?
My orphan babe unheeded will complain,
And seek a parent's fostering arms in vain;
But why these sorrows?  why these guilty fears?
Away, ye anxious, agonizing tears!
What though thy father, by misfortune's frown,
Could leave no wealth to rear his infant son?
'Twas this sad thought embitter'd his last sigh,
Yet hope in heaven illum'd his closing eye;
That sigh was heard, that hope its wish shall gain,
Ne'er can the Christian sigh and hope in vain.
Yes, thou sweet object of our tenderest cares,
We've laid thee up a treasury of prayers;
And when death's slumber seals thy mother's eyes,
And the cold earth o'er her hush'd bosom lies,
The widow's God, the orphan's friend divine,
My heavenly Father will, my child!  be thine,
Oh, ever faithful, merciful, and just,
Receive a dying mother's precious trust."

The purest, tenderest love on earth confest,
Is that which warms a feeling mother's breast;
A thousand sweet emotions form a glow
None but her generous bosom e'er can know;
Yet cold that love a mother's breast reveals,
To that which God for all his children feels;
Could in one heart all human love appear,
'Twere cold to that which met the soldier's spear.

He who for us the path of suffering trod,
Met all the wrath of an offended God,
Resign'd in deepest agonies his breath,
Pierced with our sins, yet lov'd us e'en in death,
Bore every sorrow that we none might prove&mdash;
Yes, bleeding Saviour, this indeed was love.
Mother!  sweet name!  invok'd in every pain,
Forever breath'd when infant lips complain&mdash;
First lov'd, first taught, in cherub accents sung,
When sounds imperfect flutter on the tongue;
Oh cherish'd name!  by every tie endear'd,
So lov'd in childhood, and through life rever'd;
When memory lifts the veil of years between,
Gives to my view my childhood's rosy scene,
With each scene blended, thy dear form I trace,
Gaze on each feature of thy charming face;
Again our hearts thy fond caresses prove,
Thy pleasing tasks enforc'd with smiles and love;
Death from our arms thy guardian form convey'd,
E'er yet our years thy anxious cares repaid;
But why that mournful thought?  thy God hath given
An earlier, richer recompense in heaven.
Time's lenient hand hath bid our grief remove,
We give thy gentle image only love;
The tear that bathes thy name from pain is free,
Peace loves the sigh that Memory gives to thee;
But, recent grief compels the bitter tear,
And mourns, transcendent youth!  thy early bier:
Reluctant do I wake the heartfelt sigh,
And press the chord whose touch is agony;
Fain would I spare the streaming eyes of those
Whose kindred hearts still bleed for kindred woes;
But yet permit the pensive muse to come,
And drop one flow'ret on his laurelled tomb.

Here sleep those eyes where dwelt the soul enshrin'd,
Where dawn'd the heart, where flash'd the effulgent mind,
Whose rapid lightnings could conviction dart,
E'er yet his voice impressive reach'd the heart;
O'er every noble feature genius shone,
And wrote in sunbeams, "see my favourite son,"
While heavenly virtue, with her touch divine,
Bade genius' rays with brighter glory shine:
Nor was his form less perfect than his face,
The sculptor's model for all manly grace;
Blest with those gifts to heaven's best favourites give
With grateful heart he offer'd all to heaven;
To God he gave his talents and his youth,
And breath'd, with seraph voice, resistless truth;
His genius, glowing with celestial fire,
His matchless eloquence, his tuneful lyre,
The treasures his exhaustless mind possess'd,
By powers like mine can never be express'd;
These to portray must be the historian's part&mdash;
'Twas ours to know his generous feeling heart;
In every sorrow it was our's to prove
The melting fondness of a brother's love&mdash;
Instructor!  guardian!  kind and gentle guide
Thy heart our refuge, and thy name our pride!
Thy rising greatness was our hope's sweet dream,
Thy countless virtues memory's dearest theme.
Still is that morning present to my view,
When his lov'd voice pronounced its last adieu;
With lingering step he left his father's door;
(Those welcome footsteps shall return no more;)
A look of smiling tenderness he cast&mdash;
Oh, darling brother!  was that look our last?
On life's dark day will never more arise
The brightening dawn of those soul-speaking eyes?
Soon came the tidings which bade peace depart,
And rent with anguish each devoted heart:
His ardent soul, of pure ethereal flame,
(Oh, far too ardent for his earthly frame,)
Sudden receiv'd the awful mandate given,
Had burst its mortal bands, and soar'd to heaven.
Oh, blest religion, 'twas alone thy power
That could sustain the sorrows of that hour;
Teach us to bid our murmurings all depart,
And yield to God the idol of each heart.

What, gone forever?  all our wishes crost?
No!  much lov'd brother, no!  thou art not lost;
Fame's deathless garland, which thy name enwreathes
Still in our path its soothing fragrance breathes;
Thou art not lost! &mdash; a widow'd mother's care,
Two infant boys, thy beauteous image bear:
Thou art not lost! &mdash; for thy dear memory lives&mdash;
Thy blest example every precept gives;
And while for thee we pour the unceasing tear,
Methinks thy angel spirit whispers near,
"Let not such anguish'd tears my loss deplore,
We yet shall meet where tears will be no more."

Lo!  yon poor wretch, with guilt and misery prest,
Whose waken'd conscience racks his tortur'd breast;
The world pursues him with relentless scorn,
Far from that world he flies &mdash; sad, lost, forlorn:
Can Memory soothe him? &mdash; no, she counts each crime,
And haunts him with the ghost of murder'd time;
What can Hope offer for a wretch's aid,
Condemn'd by every law which heaven hath made?
Prostrate he lies, all humbled in the dust;
What can he hope since God is always just?
A gentle voice forbids him to despair;
Is there relief for him? &mdash; oh tell him where:
Nail'd on the cross a bleeding Saviour dies,
And God accepts the awful sacrifice:&mdash;
Go, at his cross thy guilt and misery lay,
His streaming blood will wash them all away;
Redeem'd, renew'd, approv'd, and pardon'd, rise!
Thy God can bless thee, though the world despise.

Lo!  on that dreary couch, where hovers death,
A harden'd atheist draws his gasping breath;
On life's lov'd day he shuts reluctant eyes,
And dreams no future morning shall arise;
Thinks in the grave to end his guilt and care,
And tries to hope his soul will perish there.
Cold fallacy!  and can the soaring mind,
Which e'en creation's limits cannot bind,
Forever mounting to the realms of day,
Can it descend, and mingle with the clay?
Or lives there one, whose soul of noble fire
Feels that it never &mdash; never can expire?
And yet, distrustful of his lord's commands,
He throws his sacred volume from his hands;
Presumptuous dares its stamp divine disown,
And give to God a homage of his own.
His honour, nature, reason, are his guides,
And down the stream of life he smoothly glides.
See death approach, with all his trembling train
Of hopes and fears &mdash; of wishes &mdash; all in vain!
Yes, he must die; he knows that fear is just;
He feels he dies, yet knows not where to trust;
He cannot disbelieve a future state,
Yet doubts distract him of his future fate:
Through his dark mind, what clouds uncertain roll
No Saviour's smile to cheer his fainting soul&mdash;
No blissful hope of all his sins forgiven!&mdash;
No sweet assurance of a promis'd heaven!
Clos'd is the eye, the ebbing pulse is dead;
Fled is the soul &mdash; ah!  whither &mdash; whither fled?
Lives there a mind where Heaven profusely pours
Rich gifts of genius, learning's boundless stores&mdash;
Wit's sparkling eloquence, bright fancy's art,
With every charm that fascinates the heart?
Who all ungrateful for such talents given,
Joins them to Satan's bands, and wars with heaven;
Draws forth a brilliant pen, bids falsehood shine,
And breathes enchantment o'er each poison'd line;
With fiend-like ardour dares fair truth oppose,
And makes his traitor gifts religion's foes;
Oh!  yet relent!  what!  would thy cruel rage
Dash from the feeble arm the crutch of age?
Remove the surest guide of giddy youth,
And drive the asking wanderer far from truth?
Quench the sweet beam which lights each dark distress?
Bid suffering virtue cease to hope redress?
Silence the thankful heart for blessings given?
Remove the childlike confidence in heaven?
Take from the poor man all his lot that cheer's?
Bid him in anguish steep his crust in tears?&mdash;
But say, oh!  canst thou, cruel as thou art!
Wrest the last treasure from the plundered heart?
The last soft ray that gilds the vale below?
That star that rises on the night of wo?&mdash;
When the grave takes what earth can ne'er restore,
Can thy hard bosom bid us meet no more?
But if no pity can thy hand arrest,
Nor stay the baleful purpose of thy breast,
Oh!  yet relent &mdash; let fear thy soul alarm,
Dare not the thunder of the Almighty's arm.
Yet if no danger thy bold hand restrain,
If pity, terror, mercy, plead in vain,
Madman!  rush on, pursue thy dark design,
But know, to triumph never can be thine.
Ne'er hope to blot the gospel's sacred page,
It scorns thy malice &mdash; it derides thy rage.
First from its sphere bid yon bright orb be hurl'd,
And bid us wander o'er a darken'd world;
Thy vain attempts shall prove thine own disgrace,
And break like billows at the rock's firm base.
Or breathes there one who reads God's precious word&mdash;
Admires the precepts-says lie loves the Lord,
And yet with blinded heart and thick-film'd eyes,
Sees only man &mdash; the atoning God denies?

Who was that promis'd One, so long foretold,
Faith's straining vision languish'd to behold,
Shadowed with blood, to show redemption's plan,
Himself the sacrifice for ruin'd man;
Dark ages roll, and lo!  the dawn appears,
Through along vista of unfolding years,
He comes, the infant God descends to earth;
And herald angels sing his joyful birth.
No marble palace with its lofty dome,
Becomes the heavenly stranger's honour'd home;
A manger holds the God whom we adore,
Nor could earth's splendour's add one glory more.
Why does the world's creator thus appear
Without a home? &mdash; His kingdom is not here;
No greeting princes throng the gladden'd plain,
But saints and angels form his only train.
Do heaps of slain and carnag'd fields afford
The trophies gain'd by his resistless sword?
No, these are deeds by earthly heroes won,
Not such the triumphs of God's only son;
The Father's image by his God approv'd,
Proclaim'd from heaven the Son of God belov'd.
The miracles he wrought while here below,
Were miracles of love o'er human wo;
He heals the sick, bids Satan's fiends depart,
Raises the dead, and binds the bleeding heart;
He heals the lame, the dumb, the deaf, the blind,
Pours peace and pardon o'er the guilty mind;
By his blest hands are hungry thousands fed,
He is himself our souls' immortal bread;
By his obedience and example given,
He marks with living light our path to heaven;
He dies &mdash; in agonies fulfils his doom,
But rises, glorious conqueror of the tomb;
'Tis done!  yet still on earth he deigns to stay,
To soothe each fear, drive every doubt away:
But lo!  that bright refulgent morn appears,
And spreads, its blushes round the glowing spheres,
Heaven's gates unfold their everlasting light,
And hosts of angles wait the enrapturing sight,
Impatient seraphs tune each golden string,
To sound the triumphs of their rising king;
But oh!  what sound such ecstacy imparts,
'Tis like the music of dissolving hearts,
In feeling sweetness, seraphs strains above,
'Tis ransom'd saints that sing redeeming love.
Angels and saints unite in blest accord,
To welcome back their dear returning Lord.
To Bethany he leads his little band,
To bless them, see him lift each pierced hand,
See them his parting, tender charge receive,
Through them be blesses all that shall believe;
He rises from the earth, a cloud of light,
A glorious cloud receives him from their sight;
Swiftly it wafts him through the realms of air,
To Heaven, to live our intercessor there.

Think'st thou this God, this Saviour, e'er will own
That soul-less homage paid to man alone?
Oh!  poor return for all thy love hath done,
Thou man of sorrows, God's eternal Son;
And did'st thou leave thy heaven and die for this?
Again does Judas give his traitor kiss?
From thee Redemption's diadem is torn,
Again thy sacred brows are pierc'd with thorn;
They from thy hands thy kingdom's sceptre bear,
And place a reed, the insulting emblem, there;
Again the Lord of life is mock'd and tried,
And worse than foes &mdash; by friends is crucified.

But weep not, Christians, do not yet complain,
Nor fear the Saviour's blood hath flow'd in vain;
Ten thousand, thousand, thousand, round his throne
Bless their redeemer God &mdash; his glory own,
And yet ten thousand, thousand, thousand, more
Shall hail his name from earth's remotest shore;
To him all nations come, all hearts shall bless,
Each knee shall bow, and every tongue confess;
O'er the whole earth his knowledge shall o'erflow,
As the waves wash the ocean's deeps below.
