Come thou, creative maid, whose magic power,
Embodies forms enchanting as young May;
And charms the soul in each delicious hour,
When life is pleasant and all nature gay,
While round is shed thy mild enlivening ray.
O come!  for happy they, who boast thy smile!
Whose dear illusions cheat the passing day:
And can beyond Potosi's wealth beguile
Man's weary steps, as through life's gloom he goes the while.

Be here, and thy enchantment quick impart
Whether thy lovely form is haply found,
(To prove its influence o'er the thrilling heart,)
Where Yarrow's waters flow thro' fairy ground;
Or rather, the more pleasing soothing sound
Of classic streams delight thy raptur'd ear:
While blossoms shed their rich perfumes around
And woods and lawns and skies more fresh appear,
And nature's charms combine man's wond'ring mind to cheer.

For thine, each wint'ry waste, each lonely wild;
Rough ocean's mountain wave, the solemn wood;
The mossy rocks in native grandeur pil'd;
Scenes of the mountain and the roaring flood;
Joys of poetic minds and of the good.
By thee, each scene sublime delights the soul;
And gives that pleasing melancholy mood,
Which thro' the panting heart soft raptures roll;
While virtue's joys, with social bliss, our harsher thoughts control.

When wint'ry snows conceal fair nature's charms,
And the bleak gale with chilling blast assails,
Thy magic aid the ruthless storms disarms;
Then verdant are the fields and soft the gales,
And the glad mind each blooming beauty hails.
Or if we pant where scorching sunbeams glow,
Where no bless'd shade or cooling breeze prevails;
Imagination gives to tread the trackless snow,
Thro' leafless woods or on the crackling ice to go.

To thee, the warrior bows, as bold he flies
To meet the invading foe upon the shore:
How warms his patriot heart and fires his eye!
For Fancy tells him they depart no more.
He longs to hear the loud artillery roar,
And meet his daring foeman hand to hand,
And bathe the thirsty weapon in his gore.
For him is held aloft thy wondrous hand
That points to victory for his insulted land.

'Tis she, sweet maid, who charms the lover's eyes,
And pours a heavenly balm o'er all his mind;
Who constant gives the nymph for whom he sighs
With all her virtues and her charms combin'd,
Her looks bewitching and her accents kind.
Still may thou ever sooth his anxious heart,
And he in thee, his lovely mistress find,
Until the sweet confession she impart
And conscious blushes own love's dear congenial smart.

On Morven's fabled hills and stormy shore,
Where sinks the stranger's mind with solemn dread,
As list'ning to the western tempest's roar
Athwart the gloom he sees the warlike dead,
On Scotia's misty heaths who fought and bled:
Or hears the bugle shrill or sounding shield,
By mountain stream, where mighty Fingal led
The warrior chiefs, to rouse the embattled field,
And bow and spear and sword with strength gigantic wield,

Thou lov'st to stray; or else thy viewless form
Plac'd on the tow'ring rock where Conway flows,
Sweeps the loud harp, when ceas'd the battle's storm,
And sorrowful sings her slaughter'd country's woes.
Inspir'd by thee the kindling bosom glows,
And images of joy or sadness fill the mind.
The sweet Euphrosyne now Milton shows;
In sable stole with solemn step, behind,
Appears the muse, who hides the laughing beauty from mankind.

Sweet is the joy when Fancy brings to view
The lovely babe, some fleeting years gone by,
A manly champion to his country true;
Skill'd in the senate; prompt in fields to die,
For from his country's foes he scorns to fly.
Or yet a blooming nymph, her mother's joy,
Form'd to delight and fix each wand'ring eye:
Whose filial duties all her cares employ,
To sooth declining age, and life's surrounding ills destroy.

Ah!  how does beauty's smile the lips adorn,
And give a constant sunshine to the breast;
So Fancy's smile is sweeter than the morn,
In every scene, o'er every mind confest;
To know her joys is always to be blest.
But when sad tears bedew her mournful eye,
And melancholy's glooms her form invest:
Then from her heaving bosom comes the sigh,
And pleasing scenes of joy and beauty quickly fly.

Then to deep wilds and solitude she goes,
And loves reclining by the brooks forlorn,
Weeps o'er her real or imagin'd woes,
And feels the pangs of melancholy born;
While clouds and tempests darken every morn.
Painful those pleasing scenes of late so gay;
The woodland melody and hunter's horn;
Obtrusive now the brilliant light of day;
And calm resign'd she lives to pining grief a prey.

Forthwith a youth whose looks bespeak despair,
Sighs at her feet, perchance for hopeless love:
For, ever to his view appears the fair,
Whose charms he sung in each romantic grove,
Where he was wont the anxious day to rove.
Those smiles which Heaven and happiness impart
Are his no more; they warm another's love:
They animate with joy another's heart,
While his pain'd bosom rankles with the poison'd smart.

And lo the passions which convulse the mind!
Boisterous and sad along the vale appear:
All that destroy the peace of human kind;
Burning with rage, or felt the scalding tear:
Green Jealousy, Revenge and pallid Fear;
And Envy, with'ring at another's ease.
The selfish brood with looks and frowns austere,
Whom no benevolence or good nature please;
Whose looks distorted shew the troubled mind's disease.

Hark!  on the margin of the silent stream,
What pensive strains the gloomy nymph assail:
From whence proceeds the melancholy theme
Which plaintive dies along the sighing gale?
'Tis serious Gray, whose mournful lines bewail
The various ills that human bliss destroy;
And Collins, whose sweet harp could not avail
To save from penury or yield him joy;
The charms of Genius feel the anguish'd nerves alloy.

Young, too, his ever gloomy verse began,
And join'd his tones to swell the murm'ring sounds;
And moral Cowper sung of villain man:
With Beattie's Minstrel loud the wood resounds,
With plaint of man and suffering virtue's wounds:
Alas!  what melting tones steal on the ear
Of listening Fancy, and her soul confounds!
What sounds pathetic prompt her ready tear,
And to her pensive mind, the embowering groves endear!

But oh the pleasures famous bards bestow,
Whose tuneful numbers sing each wond'rous spot,
Each far fam'd stream or sacred mountain brow;
They fill the mind and never are forgot.
Well may the enthusiast boast his happy lot,
For him, Scamander rolls and Cheviot's blaze,
Reflects the Southern foe and chieftain Scot,
Upon Benledi's spear crown'd hill in deep amaze.
Now throng'd with helms, and now a barren heath I gaze.

Power immortal!  thy enchanting art,
To time eternal gives the favour'd name:
Can each sublime and lovely view impart,
Inspire the muse, and feed the constant flame
Which genius warms &mdash; Hence Homer came
In godlike majesty, to charm the age:
Succeeding times with joy the Poet claim;
For his the Warrior's pride, the battle's rage,
And Nature owns each scene and hero of his lofty page.

Inspir'd by thee, the British Muse ascends
Empyreal regions and a God adores:
Then downward to unfathom'd deeps descends
And Hell's dread horrors fearfully explores,
The burning lake and those dark dismal shores.
Then Eden blooms, how fragrant, fresh and fair
Where happy man with reverence implores
His God; while each enchantment rare,
Delights the ravish'd sense and banishes all care.

Who without joy has never heard the song,
Which like soft music steals upon the ear?
While Fays and Sprites and Ghosts and Witches throng
Around, to please, or blanch the cheek with fear;
And deep wrought sorrows force the burning tear.
Shakspeare was born to live for every age,
And to the soul of taste the muse endear,
With sweet illusions fill the various page,
With pity move the heart, or swell with boundless rage.

Hail pleasing Scot!  whose sweetly flowing song,
Delights the swain on Ettrick's banks who roves:
Wand'ring with fresh delight those scenes among,
Clan-Alpines mountain pride and piny groves;
And thrills at Malcolm's and fair Ellen's loves.
O how enchanting is the Poet's art!
With power divine it every passion moves;
With Fancy's visions throbs the enthusiast heart
As they Lock-Katrine's lake and scenes sublime impart.

O envied bards!  how great the wond'rous skill,
To thrill the heart with ecstasy and joy:
To bend whole nations to thy sacred will
With tale of minstrel or ill fated Troy,
Thine is unceasing bliss without alloy.
Lov'd is thy sacred art from pole to pole,
By Lapland youth or Persia's amorous boy;
For when the rays of Fancy round them roll,
Theirs is the envied power to captivate the soul.

And may such joys be welcom'd more and more
And rouse the genius of this unfam'd land;
In lofty strain like wizard Scot to soar,
And court the Muses to this foreign strand.
Fainting they droop and wait the mild command;
For British skies no longer genial glow;
And Linden's Muse &mdash; The harp which owns the hand
Of sad Montgomery, are all we know,
Since the full stream with Gray and Collins ceas'd to flow.

O come Imagination!  grant thy aid,
The promis'd Genius of this land to see:
When every lofty hill and rural glade,
The Muse's sacred haunts shall proudly be:
And magic visions beam around for thee,
Then shall a second Homer rouse that fire,
Our humbled sons forget once made them free;
Then shall another Dryden string the lyre;
A Shakspeare Avon leave, for Susquehannah's side.

Where venerable ruins proudly stand,
She loves to stay, and think on ages past.
They, rudely great, a solemn awe command
For distant years have dimly overcast
The times when Ossian's harp hung in the blast.
Up the long stream of time the Fancy goes,
When songs of bards adorn'd the Chief's repast,
The heart with sacred feeling warmly glows;
The mould'ring turret 'round a melancholy throws.

Where'er the wand'ring distant traveller strays,
On India's coast or Greenland's ice-bound shore;
Or feels on Nubia's sands the scorching rays,
As bold he dares the Niger's source explore
Heedless of savage tribes, or tiger's roar.
Wrapt in thy fairy mantle he surveys
The heavenly hue each home lov'd object wore:
With brighter tints they court his eager gaze;
And sooth his wearied heart and promise happier days.

O happy man!  and how supremely blest;
To see the future with propitious eyes:
While soothing visions warm the youthful breast,
And sweet delusions cheat him till he dies&mdash;
To court her smiles is always to be wise.
The sacred boon kind Heaven in pity gave,
Well may the aid divine fond mortals prize:
Imagination charms us to the grave;
Her witching spells from real ills of life can save.

And even beyond the grave she loves to soar,
And trace those future mansions in the sky:
And sacred blissful realms above explore:
Far from this fading world she longs to fly
Where God appears to the astonish'd eye.
Hail happy regions!  scenes of endless joy!
For which the mortal sufferer heaves the sigh
Where bliss supreme is found without alloy;
And themes of boundless love and praise the soul employ!

Say can imagination raptur'd view
Each lovely scene and not to Heaven aspire?
Each picture e'er admiring Poet drew,
Without the glad enthusiast's glowing fire?
And, oh the bliss!  when joys that never tire;
Unclouded skies, and fields forever fair,
Devotion true and holy love inspire!
Where man is happy and unknown to care,
And the rich boon both he and minist'ring angels share.

Here, tho' each scene is fair, and soft the gale;
And kindly suns their genial gifts impart:
Tho' sweetest scents the budding flowers exhale,
And social good with gladness warms the heart:
Yet vice and misery have their gloomy part,
And the wild hurricane those charms destroy;
The raging earthquakes vanquish human art,
And natures various sweets have their alloy;
While pestilence and war combine to murder human joy.

Enchanting Maid, farewell!  O may thou still,
Breath on the Minstrel harp and wake the strings:
Bend the retiring  Poet to thy will,
And hover o'er him with thy guardian wings.
Harp of the north!  thee from his grasp he flings;
Nor longer courts thy Heaven directed spell;
No longer new his tuneful number rings
With witching melody along the dell,
O dear enchantress!  leave him not &mdash; farewell.
