PART I.
On human kind when pitying heav'n survey'd,
The iron hand of stern Affliction laid;
When toil and sorrow all their powers combin'd,
To crush the body, and o'erwhelm the mind;
From what blest source was then ordain'd to flow,
The soothing cordial of the deepest wo!
From thee, sweet FRIENDSHIP!  from thy magic smile,
Then flow'd the power each sorrow to beguile;
The wounds of pain and fortune to repair,
And smooth the passage through a life of care!

'Tis yonder sun, when blooms the beauteous Spring,
That bids the vallies smile, the woodlands sing;
When summer scenes their splendid charms display,
He gives effulgence to the ardent day;
And he, when Autumn's mellow stores appear,
Affords the bounties of the ripen'd year;
From him proceeds, when wintry blasts alarm,
What power still aged nature has to charm!

Thus Friendship bids the days of childhood smile,
With many a soften'd scene, and artless wile;
And when the warmth of youthful vigor glows,
Affection's sympathising throb bestows;
And yields each joy that in the bosom blooms,
When the ripe mind its mellow'd form assumes;
And in that season, when to hoary years,
No glowing scene of gay delight appears;
No charms are felt but what from Friendship flow,
The glorious sun of human life below!

Dire was the hour when shuddering nature saw,
The first sad breach e'er made in Friendship's law!
The world still smil'd, with boundless charms in store,
And man was blest, though Eden was no more!
For sweet affection led him on the way,
And cloth'd in beauty each succeeding day;
Till Abel's blood made heavenly vengeance glow,
And show'd that Friendship had on earth a foe!
Till then fell not the curse of guilt on man,
And first from Friendship's wounds, mortality began.

O!  with what pangs the father of our race,
Bewail'd his own, and nature's dire disgrace!
"My son," he cried," my righteous Abel bleeds,
Slain by his sire's, and by his brother's deeds!
Ah!  this is death!  that death which heaven hath sworn,
For my accurst transgression must be borne!
On me alone should all the vengeance fall;
But O!  'twill crush my children! &mdash; crush them all!"
He said, and sunk in agonizing grief,
The first of human sinners, not the chief!

Friendship!  to thee, unsullied joys belong,
Joys that can bless ev'n heaven's immortal throng.
In those bright realms, so rich in every joy,
That Hope herself would but the bliss annoy,
(For Hope where'er she comes, however fair,
Still Fear, th' attendant of her path, is there)
Angelic hosts affection's raptures prove,
And holy anthems tell their mutual love!
Fair friendship binds the whole celestial frame,
For Love in heaven and Friendship are the same.

Stem of delight!  endearing is thy power,
When vernal age first spreads its op'ning flower;
In that soft season, when to nature new,
Each passing scene delights the wond'ring view;
When young ideas fill the vacant mind,
With sweet surprise, and pleasure unconfin'd;
When restless thought to quick transition prone,
Impatient roams till every charm be known;
Thy smiles alone the truant can arrest,
And fix some young associate in the breast.

Yes, first of all the heav'n-descended train
Of man's superior joys, begins thy reign,
Fair Friendship!  sovereign of the soothing sway,
That charms our toils, and drives our cares away.
For long ere Love, with raptures ne'er express'd,
And blissful anguish, fires the throbbing breast;
Ere Fancy's pencil paints a scene more gay,
Than that experienc'd in the blest to-day;
Ere Hope's fond visions to the mind reveal
Those future raptures that it ne'er shall feel,
Like midnight meteors, with deceitful ray,
That promise morn, when morn is far away;
Ere mem'ry's wand, with backward touch benign,
Can make the past with lovelier lustre shine;
Ere Wisdom, like the polar star, can guide,
Towards the path where lasting joys abide;
Ere bright Religion, with persuasive voice,
Can make th' unfading bliss of heaven our choice;
Congenial Friendship brings the potent spell,
To bid the young affections softly swell,
The sweets of fond society impart,
Whose cordial balm exhilarates the heart!

And say, when age, with retrospective view,
Surveys the tender years when life was new,
When the young mind felt e'en this world could bless,
Nor wish'd a happier Eden to possess;
Of all the joys in mem'ry's magic store,
So oft with fond endearment counted o'er,
What can the heart to equal rapture warm,
With those to which affection gave the charm!
How warmly cherish'd, with a deep regret,
Our heart's first friend, whom we can ne'er forget!

Still lightly o'er the lawn we see him bound,
And with exulting bosom leap the mound&mdash;
We glow to think, when rural feats were done,
With him the applause, alternately, we won.
Though in the race victorious he was nam'd,
We justly still the prize of combat claim'd;
Still to a greater height we urg'd the ball,
Though he with surer aim could meet its fall.&mdash;
Oft down the glen together have we stray'd,
To watch our snares for fawns or foxes laid;
Oft spent whole days in consultation deep,
How most secure the linnet's nest to keep,
Or joy'd the woodland echoes to awake,
Or rous'd the victim plover from the brake,
Or mark'd the hawk, the pirate of the sky,
And let the leaden vengeance on him fly.&mdash;
Oft by the river's brink we took our stand,
And drew the agitated fry to land;
Or trimm'd our bounding skiff with easy sail,
And lightly scudded with a pleasant gale;
Or thence retiring to domestic bowers,
While young Imagination charm'd the hours,
Arabian genii all their terrors spread,
And wonder swell'd our bosoms while we read;
Or haply, with a nobler flame we glow,
Inspir'd to bold adventure by De Foe!
How brightly bloom'd the interesting isle,
And danger charmed us with attractive smile.

O!  days belov'd, when innocence and joy,
The bosom fill'd, and fill'd without alloy!
No grief we mourn'd on stern misfortune built,
We knew no sorrow, for we knew no guilt.
O!  recollection's sweetest, fairest charm,
That still has power each languid pulse to warm;
Without thy bright invigorating ray,
Life would be lassitude and dull decay.
When I forget thee, O, my earliest friend,
Joy shall be lost, and mem'ry at an end!
Though years of toil have numerous crept between
Those glowing days, and age's tasteless scene;
Though sever'd now by many a different clime,
Gay, fertile vale, and hoary mount sublime;
Though doom'd by fate, perhaps, to meet no more,
And live again our days of pleasure o'er;
Still, when my daily prayers to heaven ascend,
I beg for blessings on my earliest friend;
While mem'ry owns that Friendship's smile bestows
The brightest charm her magic mirror shows.

Angelic soother of the troubled breast!
Thy smiles can charm the fiercest grief to rest.
When struck to earth by stern misfortune's blow.
O'erwhelmed with anguish, penury and wo,
All comfort fled, e'en flatterers disappear;
Ah!  then how sweet thy whisperings to our ear!
Thy gentle voice can bid our spirits rise,
And Hope's blest visions brighten in our eyes;
And like the beacon's light that gleams afar,
To midnight sailors as their guardian star,
Thy sympathising glance dispels our fears,
And safe to port our found'ring vessel steers.

To all the depths of misery consigned,
Wounded in body, agoniz'd in mind,
Montalbot lay, the victim of despair,
And wish'd the grave would give him refuge there.

On Liffey's bank, the rural mansion stood,
Fair was the vale, romantic was the wood;
Sublime the mountain, and the hand of taste,
With fairy loveliness the landscape grac'd.
Respected, affluent, blest with letter'd ease,
And cheerful mind that taught each toil to please,
A sweet and virtuous fair his wishes crown'd,
With mutual love in blissful union bound;
And in two lovely babes, his raptur'd heart
Enjoy'd a charm the world could ne'er impart;&mdash;
But, ah!  too soon misfortune's tempest rose,
And bade the scene of short enjoyment close!
Rebellion's bloody standard rear'd his head,
And death and desolation round him spread.

Before the eve of that eventful day,
Whose dawn had found thee happy, fond, and gay,
Spouse of Montalbot!  how thy bosom bled,
As ruin, death, and horror round thee spread!
In vain thy husband's high-born courage rose,
To check the whelming tide of ruffian foes&mdash;
Vain were thy tears and loveliness to melt
Barbarian hearts that pity never felt.
The spreading flames of ruin rag'd around,
And devastation smok'd along the ground;
And, streaming by the faggot's blaze, is shown
That blood to thee far dearer than thy own!
With frantic speed thy close embrace repress'd
The life-stream issuing from thy husband's breast,
And with an agony of zeal to save,
Strain'd to thy bosom, held him from the grave!

But, ah!  fond woman, what avails thy care,
Think'st thou thy barbarous foes e'er learn'd to spare!
Montalbot, know, it is their stern decree,
To-morrow dies upon the gallows-tree!
Wilt thou implore his life?  Ah!  will thy tears
Persuade the stubborn heart a savage bears!
Stern to their purpose, lo!  thy foes remain,
And love, and grief, and beauty plead in vain!

Lo!  where Montalbot, welt'ring in his gore,
Lies on a wretched hovel's swampy floor;
His bosom stung with horror, pain, and grief,
He longs for death to give his woes relief;
When Connor came, who had that day afar,
In other fields led forth the rebel war.
At his command, the captive was unbound,
His frame refresh'd, and sooth'd was every wound.
He then with sympathising voice began,
To speak of comfort to the wretched man:

"Arise, Montalbot, let thy griefs be o'er,
No hostile hand shall dare to harm thee more;
What I command, my followers obey,
Appointed o'er their hardy ranks to sway&mdash;
Think not, because my hostile banners wave
Their emerald bloom proud England's pow'r to brave,
Nor think, because to patriot feelings true,
Bold insurrection's sword I strongly drew,
And fir'd with zeal my country's wrongs to right,
I lead her valiant natives to the fight,
That e'er those happier times I shall forget,
When first in scenes of youthful joy we met,
When in Eblana's academic shade,
Through fragrant bowers of classic lore we stray'd;
Or in those paths where science strews her fruit,
With glowing bosoms bent our fond pursuit,
And strove with all the energy of youth,
To shine in knowledge, manliness, and truth.
Oh!  by those scenes we ne'er shall witness more,
By that perpetual friendship which we swore!
No party rage, no warmth of public strife,
Shall dare attack thy property or life.
Thy Connor's arm protection will afford,
And happiness to thee shall be restor'd.
Oh!  if my friend our patriot cause would join,
What glory should be his, what pleasure mine!
But here no force thy sentiments shall move,
Be free to act as conscience may approve."

"My generous friend!" the rescu'd captive said,
"By warmth of heart to error's path betray'd,
Oh!  that I could conviction's light bestow
On thee, to whom the boon of life I owe!
Oh!  that I could from wisdom snatch a ray,
To lure thee from the dangers of thy way!&mdash;
But while with gratitude my bosom glows,
It is not mine thy errors to expose.
Yet should misfortune's clouds around thee low'r,
May I be near to shield thee in that hour!
When vict'ry smiles on England's sacred cause,
And thou be yielded to offended laws,
On me, on me thy safety shall depend,
Our king shall know thou wert Montalbot's friend!"

Ere twice yon moon her fullness had attain'd,
At judgment's bar young Connor was arraign'd:
His crimes are prov'd; the awful hour is nigh,
Decreed by rigid law that he shall die.
That hour is come, tears moisten every face,
Death's slow procession moves with solemn pace;
The muffl'd music stops its mournful sound,
And num'rous guards the fatal tree surround,&mdash;
When mark!  yon horseman flashes o'er the plain,
Less swift the tempest hurries o'er the main;
The foaming steed now rushes through the crowd,
The agitated rider shouts aloud&mdash;
"A pardon to the pris'ner! &mdash; to my friend!"
At once the air a thousand voices rend&mdash;
Montalbot swift displays with joyful face,
The pleasing instrument of royal grace;
And breathless, hastes the captive to untie,
Falls on his neck, and sobs aloud for joy.

"I thank thee, heaven!  the trying hour is o'er,
The storm is weather'd, may it rage no more!
Restor'd to life, oh!  never let us part,
Of all my friends thou dearest to my heart!
Let us retire afar from party strife,
To the deep vale of sweet domestic life;
And while along the stream of time we glide,
Oh!  may the chart of wisdom be our guide!
And while we glow with patriotic zeal,
As Erin's children should for Erin's weal,
May our example to her sons display,
The blessings to be found in virtue's way!
Oh!  may we feel that as our years increase,
Our beat ambition is the love of peace,
That patriotism when rightly understood,
Is that warm feeling for our neighbour's good,
Which like the fertilizing show'rs of Spring,
That bid the blooming vales with gladness ring,
With active influence prospers all around,
And is with blessings of the poor man crown'd;
And feels from Friendship's generous bosom rise,
The beat and noblest joys the world supplies!"

From thy blest smile what soothing pow'r can flow,
Attendant angel on the couch of wo!
On yon poor wand'rer in a foreign land,
Lo!  harsh disease has laid his torturing hand;
Each limb is rack'd with unremitting pain,
And quenchless fever fires his throbbing brain;
While on his wishes none are found to wait,
Save hireling strangers careless of his fate.
Should he, even he, while sinking in despair,
Remember home and all his friendships there,
The pleasing thought can calm the fever's rage,
Sweet hope inspire, and agony assuage.
But, oh!  if fortune to his ear should send,
Th' endearing accents of a youthful friend,
The well-known voice would drive his cares away,
Bid pleasure's smile o'er all his features play,
Arrest the progress of destroying pain,
And snatch the victim back to life again!

Or if the winged soul be doom'd to fly
The troubled precincts of mortality;
While o'er her brittle tenement of clay,
She fondly lingers, anxious to delay;
For the dear objects of her hopes and fears,
The loves and friendships of her busy years,
She feels with magic force around her twin'd,
And sighs &mdash; compell'd to leave them all behind.
Oh!  if some friend that gave her youth delight,
Should chance e'en now to bless her anxious sight,
Some friend, who absent long, and far remote,
Had ne'er by warm affection been forgot;
What pleasure to her parting flight is given!
Rejoic'd she quits the world and mounts to heaven!

Thus Israel, who with unavailing tears,
Had spent a length of melancholy years;
While Joseph's long-lost form his fancy drew,
Grief was the only luxury he knew!
Nought could the sorrows of his soul abate,
His child was gone, uncertain was his fate!
With hopes and fears in long continued strife,
The mournful patriarch clung to wretched life:
When heaven at length restor'd the darling boy,
And his heart flow'd with gratitude and joy;
"My God," he cried, "now let thy will be done,
I die contented &mdash; I have seen my son!"

Ah!  still when secret sorrows rend the heart,
When hidden passions sting with bitter smart,
Or sharp remorse for deeds or thoughts conceal'd,
Bids all the soul to inward torture yield,
The friendly bosom that can share our grief,
Is the best sanctuary to yield relief,
To quench the fiery aspect of despair,
And ease the lab'ring mind of half its care!

When the warm glow of love's delicious fires,
The ardent soul of melting youth inspires;
Ere yet he dares with trembling heart disclose,
To beauty's ear the fervour of his woes;
When to the covert of the woods he flies,
In nature's silent shades to vent his sighs;
Or on the brink of some lone stream reclin'd,
Breathes on the whisp'ring gale his bursting mind;
Or haply while around from every spray,
The woodland warblers pour th' enamour'd lay,
With kindred flame, he imitates the strain,
And woos the willing muse to sooth his pain;
Oh!  then how sweet, if to some friendly ear,
Which with soft sympathy his tale will hear,
He can reveal the sorrows of his breast,
And lull with fond complaints his griefs to rest!

Or he who yielding in temptation's day,
Had in the paths of sinners gone astray,
Awakes at length, his guilty course restrains,
And the great conquest of his passions gains;
Should he, while time with constant step proceeds,
Still sicken at the mem'ry of his deeds,
Nor find in penitence a suasive balm,
The stormy feelings of his soul to calm,
Then let some friend, with potent aid, impart
The boon of comfort to his wounded heart,
And bring a draught divine from mercy's store,
To bid the stricken conscience grieve no more!

When youth engag'd in education's cares,
To act his part in future life prepares,
If manly wishes in his bosom swell,
In every bright attainment to excel,
He soon selects, to raise his flagging pow'rs,
Some fond companion of his studious hours,
Whose learning, genius, conduct he admires.
And warm for equal excellence aspires;
While noble pride and emulative zeal,
Bid his friend's mind a rival ardour feel;
And each a lov'd and bright example views,
That gilds the course his kindled soul pursues.
No jealous hatred in their bosoms burns,
They love, admire, and emulate by turns;
And when at last they try the stormy world,
The chart of knowledge to their eyes unfurl'd,
They heave a sigh of manly grief to part,
And bear through life the friendship of the heart.

Come, Emulation!  on thy dazzling wing,
Thy fav'rite child, Improvement, with thee bring;
And while mankind her brilliant acts admire,
Do thou proclaim that Friendship is her sire.
Inspir'd by thee, with ardent mind he strove
To imitate thy deeds &mdash; and gain'd thy love!
Together join'd, ye dare the heaviest toil
Requir'd by Science on her sternest soil:
Whether with Newton to the heavens ye soar,
And ranging boundless nature o'er and o'er,
Detect the laws that own creative might,
That wing the comet for his airy flight,
That rule the expanse of planetary space,
And bind the circling orbits in their place!
Or thence descending, let the Swedish sage,
In fields of fragrant flowers your thoughts engage,
With pleasing care their characters are known,
And all their charms and virtues made your own!

Perhaps, attracted by the arts, ye stray
To Rosa's shades, or Titian's brighter ray;
And pause where'er the human face appears
Array'd in mimic smiles, or bath'd in tears;
O!  seize the charms bright Fancy's colours give,
And bid the canvass, warm with nature, live!
Or seek yon ancient dome whose roof beneath,
The marble seems in human form to breathe,
And there inspire a throb to genius true,
And bid your chissel be immortal too!

Lo!  to your eyes the chemist's art unfolds
The wondrous secrets nature's bosom holds!
At your command expands her hidden store,
And treasures spring the world ne'er saw before!
Her laws, obedient to your potent skill,
Perform a new creation at your will;
While men admire, as your bright arts disclose
The mighty pow'r the arm of science knows!

Now, warm with patriotic fervour, try
To plead your country's cause with energy;
The public voice will hail your bright career,
And senates listen with delighted ear.
Or learn the arts triumphant fields have won,
And rival Europe's victor, Wellington!

Or for sublimer themes will ye prepare,
And make the immortal souls of men your care?
Your heaven-born eloquence shall strongly move
The wand'ring heart, and fix its views above;
On darkling spirits pour celestial day,
And warm the troubled soul with mercy's ray!
The sceptic's breast with christian zeal shall glow,
And stubborn bosoms sweet compassion know,
As from your lips descends the god-like strain;
And Kirwin's mighty pow'r is felt again!

At silent midnight's meditative hour,
The watchful seaman feels thy cheering pow'r,
Inspiring Friendship!  as he views from far,
Heaven's azure circle gemm'd with many a star&mdash;
Yon wand'ring orb, night's cold but lovely queen,
Illumes the sky, and gilds the wat'ry scene;
The stately vessel spreads the waving sail,
To catch each impulse of th' unsteady gale:
In thoughtful mood reclining o'er her side,
He views her progress through th' expanding tide,
And sighs to think, as o'er each wave she moves,
She bears him farther still from those he loves!

But yielding soon to Fancy's sweet command,
He visits once again his native land;
Again the haunts of youthful pleasure views,
Again the throb of past delight renews!
Again the fields of rural sports are seen,
The blooming meadows, and the smiling green,
The sacred walk to Friendship long consign'd,
The spot where love first fir'd his youthful mind!
Lo!  now the sire, who taught his youth, appears,
And, hark!  his mother's honour'd voice he hears!
The brothers, sisters, that his childhood blest,
Once more are welcom'd, and once more caress'd;
The female charmer of his soul, again
Is to his bosom clasp'd with raptur'd strain;
With warmth he pours the fullness of his heart,
Renews his vows, and pledges ne'er to part.
But oh!  what holier feeling can allure,
Less warm, perhaps, than love, but, ah!  more pure,
To seek the well-known cottage which contains
The friend long faithful to his joys and pains!
That fond embrace, how ardent and sincere!
Those looks, that voice of confidence, how dear!
Truth's purest throb within his bosom glows,
And the full measure of his feelings flows,
As all disclos'd to friendship's secret ear,
He tells each joy and grief, each hope and fear:
And thus unburdon'd, feels prepar'd to try
Life's rugged road with greater buoyancy.

O!  as along life's stormy vale I stray,
Be Friendship still companion of my way!
Then when temptation shall her arts prepare,
And spread her golden nets my feet to snare,
My watchful guide shall warn me of her toils,
And safe convey me from the syren's wiles.
Or should misfortune's harsher hand employ
Those darts that wound the soul, and peace destroy,
With loss of property, or health distress'd,
Or by the malice of mankind oppress'd,
To thy sweet pow'r, when whelming ills invade,
Oh!  blissful Friendship!  then I fly for aid;
For thou art true, though all the world deceive,
Still wise to counsel, ready to relieve,
Design'd by Heav'n, from whom thy virtues flow,
The chief ambassador of good below!

In those bright islands of the Western main,
Where Europe's sons, allur'd by thirst of gain,
With vent'rous spirit tempt the torrid sky,
Rise swift to fortune, sicken, faint, and die,
The Negro, see!  by trade's unfeeling pow'r,
Torn from his home, and sweet paternal bow'r;
Where issuing of the shone with manly grace,
And led his fellow-negroes to the chace!
Or when, his country's battles to sustain,
His arm was wanted in a hostile plain,
He led her warlike tribes, a patriot band,
Engag'd her foes, and drove them from the land!

O!  then what rapture blest his high career,
When burst the song of vic'try on his ear!
When maidens prais'd the deeds his arm had done,
And crown'd him with the wreath his valour won?
Ah!  little thought Laongo's chief that day,
That bound with chains, in regions far away,
Those buoyant limbs should e'er the scourge sustain,
Those sinewy arms increase a miser's gain!
That form, dispos'd in nature's hardiest mood,
To range the forest, or to stem the flood;
That free-born mind of bold and generous frame,
That keenly felt ambition's noblest flame,
Should toil to gratify a stranger's will,
Or bow'd to earth the trembling task fulfil!
Where yok'd with brutes he works the stubborn soil,
Or sick and fainting, respite begs from toil;
E'en there, in ling'ring misery's last excess,
Can Friendship come with sovereign pow'r to bless.&mdash;
For, lo!  he marks among the afflicted train,
One fellow-suff'rer from Laongo's plain,
Whose tears with his in sympathy can flow,
Whose ear will listen to his plaint of wo,
Whose heart deplores the sorrows of his chief,
And while he shares them, longs to give relief!

In converse oft, when daily toil they end,
How cheering to the soul the hours they spend!
How oft they tell the ever-pleasing tale,
Of times long past in fair Laongo's vale!
The chase, the feast, the song are brought to mind,
The loves, the joys, and friendships left behind;
Mem'ry's sweet opiate sooths them to repose,
And into short oblivion lulls their woes.
Affection thus can soften every pain,
Grief rends the heart, which Friendship binds again.

So nature, when in wintry fetters bound,
The streams, the hills, and vallies frozen round,
Feels the warm influence of the Southern wind,
And heaven's meridian rays her chains unbind.
With sudden life, earth's op'ning charms appear,
And spring to hail the renovating year.
But, ah!  short-liv'd the glories they assume,
The North again blows wild, and nips their bloom!
Again submitting to th' inclement sky,
They feel, they shrink, they shiver, and they die!

In fair Europa's civiliz'd domain,
Where learning, arts, and arms unrivall'd reign,
Is there no gen'rous pow'r for virtue strong&mdash;
O!  if there is, why, does it sleep so long?
When her lost sons in wretched thousands lie,
Beneath the murd'rous Moor's barbarity;
Or where fierce Lybians, with fanatic zeal,
Apply to christian nerves the torturing steel!
Hark!  bound and buffetted, in yonder walls,
In vain yon helpless man for mercy calls;
He writhes in agony beneath the rod,
Still faithful to his country, and his God!
His heart may burst, his flesh consume away,
But virtue shall survive the bitter day!
The threats, the stripes, the tortures, he disdains,
Peace dwells within, for conscience still remains!
Lo!  here, where every terror is array'd,
Where nature shrinks, and courage is dismay'd,
Blest Friendship comes, and on seraphic wing,
The unexpected ransom loves to bring,
With smiles to cheer the features of despair,
And ease the lacerated heart of care!

So Mercy's angel flew at Heavens command,
To bring relief to Israel's suff'ring land&mdash;
He found her sunk in slavery's dark abyss,
And wav'd his wand her sorrows to dismiss.
Her fallen tribes felt courage at the sight,
And rose enthusiasts for their country's right!
Their bonds were burst, their tyrants overthrown,
And Gideon's fiery sword triumphant shone!

Long, hapless Riley!  long thy bosom bled,
As faint and weary o'er the desert led,
The savage Arabs urg'd thy painful way,
And mock'd thy feeble frame that begg'd delay.
How flow'd thy anguish at th' appalling view,
As famine daily thinn'd thy wretched crew!
How oft for death thy harrass'd bosom pray'd,
As to the dust thy sinking soul was weigh'd!
Till to a Briton's ear thy sorrows came,
And on his heart impress'd a brother's claim.&mdash;
What blissful throbs thy grateful bosom knew,
When to thy aid on pity's wings he flew,
And bade, with gen'rous warmth, thy suff'rings end,
And hail'd thee as a freeman, and a friend!

Yes, Britain's star shall shine with glorious ray,
As when avenging Bona's bloody day;
When Algiers saw destruction's arm reveal'd,
And her proud battlements constrain'd to yield;
When solemn pledge her trembling rulers gave,
Her soil no more should hold a christian slave;
When issuing forth from many a loathsome cell,
Her famish'd captives bade their chains farewell,
And turning from their tyrants, proud no more,
Hail'd their deliv'rers from Britannia's shore,
Whose mighty pow'r had broke the oppressor's chain,
And freedom, life, and joy restor'd again!
O!  with what joy Pellew's brave bosom beat!
What thrilling transport ran through all his fleet!
As from their decks the gallant victors see,
The tyrants humbled, and the captives free!
Of either sex, from every Christian land,
What grateful thousands crowd along the strand,
Who soon on board are welcomed and caress'd
And many a Briton strains a Briton's breast!

Thus ardent glows the grateful virgin's mind,
When on her brave deliv'rer's neck reclined,
She thanks that courage which had dar'd the wave,
And boldly snatch'd her from a wat'ry grave.
Thus thrills with ecstasy the raptur'd swain,
As the sweet form he rescued from the main,
Is closely to his gallant bosom prest,
And warm approving conscience makes him blest!

May Britain's cross, the world's transcendant star,
Still in the cause of mercy shine afar!
Still bid mankind their fearless tenor keep,
On the broad land, or on the boundless deep,
And cleanse each stain her own bright lustre knows,
India's deep wrongs, and Afric's bitter woes!
And tell the lawless plund'rers of mankind,
"Here end your course, and thither be confin'd!"


PART II.
Hark!  with a sneer, yon misanthrope exclaim
All men are false, and Friendship but a name!
That wisdom teaches with distrust to view
The world's regards as treach'rous and untrue;
That acts of Friendship but in self commence,
That sordid motives prompt benevolence!
That tender pity, and those feelings strong,
Which rouse the patriot's arm, the poet's song;
That gen'rous love which, in the tender page,
Enchants the mind at youth's unthinking age;
All these, when truth shall scrutinize severe,
Shall in their naked hues of self appear,
Invented merely in pedantic schools,
To draw the minds of children and of fools!

O!  ye to nature's purest joys unknown,
Can ye presume to judge, with hearts of stone,
The throbs that actuate an immortal soul,
O'er which eternal wisdom has control!
Think ye the stature of each heaven-born mind,
To the mean measure of your own confin'd!
As well the sluggish owl that courts the night,
Might check the eagle in his son-ward flight,
And think, because to him it is not given,
No nobler bird can face the light of heaven!

O!  cease, ye vile injurious sland'rers, cease!
Nor boast your torpid feelings lull'd to peace!
We envy not your clay-cold hearts that know
No joy in rescuing other hearts from wo;
We envy not the indurated tone
Of feelings touch'd but for yourselves alone.&mdash;
In vain to you, from nature's bounteous hand,
Your fellow men are blest in every land:
Not e'en the joys your kindest brethren know,
Can bid your dull sensations warmly glow.&mdash;
Lost to delight of every gen'rous kind,
The glowing fancy and enraptur'd mind,
Th' ecstatic throb that ardent bosoms warms,
When lovers rush into each other's arms,
Or pledging oft their tender vows anew,
In melting sorrow bid a long adieu!

O!  lives there, heaven!  of human form possess'd,
Who doubts the purity of HOWARD'S breast
Or who contemns with hateful, impious thought,
The man, who deeds befitting angels, wrought!
His home, his ease, his pleasure, he forsakes,
Around the world th' unwearied journey takes,
While heaven's own ardours in his bosom glow,
To blunt misfortune's poignancy below.

Lo!  where in poverty's neglected cell,
Pain, want, and modesty are forc'd to dwell;
Where pride disdains to stoop, and wealth goes by
With mutter'd insults, or averted eye!
Unhop'd-for aid his willing hand bestows,
And health and comfort reinstate repose.

Behold in prison walls where guilt is laid,
Where all the forms of misery invade,
Where wretched felons breathe infectious air,
And victims of oppression find despair!
Harsh sounds the clanking of the murd'rer's chain,
With groans, and loathsome jests, and oaths profane!
There see the messenger of comfort come,
Despair is hush'd and blasphemy is dumb!
Health takes the place of feebleness and pain,
And anarchy submits to order's reign!
Repentant scoffers now no more are rode,
And harden'd sinners glow with gratitude!

Illustrious pattern for the friends of man!
Whose stream of life in heav'nly currents ran;
Long shall thy name by nations be rever'd,
To every feeling, virtuous heart endear'd!
When kings and conq'rors to the dust consign'd,
Shall be forgot, or hated by mankind,
Thy mem'ry still, as age to age succeeds,
Shall rouse admiring men to virtuous deeds;
And, grav'd on every noble heart, thy name
Shall still be dear to charity and fame!
Whence men shall learn the holiest acts below,
To seek the wretched and relieve their wo!

O!  Charity, thou lovely, soft-ey'd maid,
Who shun'st the haunts of riot and parade;
Oppos'd to fashion, luxury, and pride,
Thou cling'st to merit's unobtrusive side!
Delighted with the honest mind to stray,
Afar from dissipation's noisy way,
Afar from where the mercenary train
Of av'rice toil, their venal ends to gain;
Deep in the covert of the silent shade,
Thou find'st th' unhappy, and thou giv'st them aid!
O!  fairest offspring of indulgent heaven,
To wretched sons of men in mercy given!
From thee what inexhausted blessings flow,
To equalize the wrongs of fate below!
The social throb, the tender-streaming eye,
The cheering voice, the heart-expressing sigh,
The open hand the needy to relieve,
And the kind heart the erring to forgive:
O!  never leave the world while it contains
One breast that sorrows, or one deed that pains!
One anguish'd breast, by harsh oppression torn,
Or griev'd by hate or taught by love to mourn.
Be still our guide to happier realms afar,
Our daily pillar, and our nightly star!
O!  melt the flinty hearts of wealth and pride,
Teach them the tender joys by thee supplied;
Teach them those hostile passions to control,
That shut the heart, and brutalize the soul;
Close those foul deeds that sordid self began,
And make repentant man, the friend of man!

True; oft the honest mind has tried in vain,
One genuine friend among mankind to gain;
Full oft the false profession has believ'd,
And still when most assur'd was most deceiv'd!
Has felt affection with neglect repaid,
Has felt the bitter pang of faith betray'd,
The sland'rous tongue, the harsh insulting mood,
Th' unfounded charge, the base ingratitude!  

Nay, there are men, most curst of all below,
Who but assume the friend to act the foe;
Who, like the viper lurking in the breast,
Ensnare our peace, then stab, and stand confest!
From such may guardian spirits keep me free,
The hell-born sons of foul hyprocrisy!
Of all the evils that on life attend,
The most heart-rending is a treach'rous friend.&mdash;
For O!  a friend whose heart is true and warm,
Life's purest blessing, and its dearest charm,
Proportion'd to the joy from him we gain,
Harsh disappointment brings a weight of pain!

But, ah!  profane not Friendship's sacred name,
Call these not friends &mdash; of spurious brood they came&mdash;
Like the night-meteor of the swampy way,
That lures the wand'rer with deceitful ray.
To his fond wish some cottage-light it seems,
And warm with hope he follows where it gleams;
But sinks at once, deserted in the gloom
Of some o'erwhelming marsh, to meet his doom.
So baleful Flattery &mdash; such is human fate&mdash;
May, cloth'd in Friendship's garb, usurp his seat,
And his deceitful front in smiles array,
Till some unguarded victim fall his prey!

But how unwise, ye who from this suppose,
That in the human breast no friendship glows!
As well, false reasoners!  might ye contest,
That genuine love ne'er warm'd the virgin breast,
Because a heartless race, with selfish view,
Have boasted transports which they never knew!
As well suppose no piety on earth,
Because the world has given an atheist birth!
Or that no age can faithfulness afford,
Because a Judas once betray'd his Lord!

Yes, there are men, benevolence may trust,
Whose hearts are faithful, and whose aims are just,
Whose liberal minds extend to all the race,
Whose acts redeem the species from disgrace;
And who enamour'd of fair virtue's charms,
With warm affection spread their ardent arms,
To all whose bosoms can with their's combine,
In generous acts, and charity divine!

Such was that holy man when here below,
Who taught my heart the charms of lore to know,
Taught me to feel the pleasures of the soul,
And bade my firstling thoughts in numbers roll.
Oft as I would, in short excursions, try
On half-fledg'd wings through Fancy's realms to fly,
My feeble flights he kindly lov'd to aid,
When falling, rais'd, restor'd me when I stray'd.&mdash;
Blest shade!  now thron'd amidst the choirs above,
If still thy once lov'd pupil shares thy love,
Transmit a portion of that ray divine,
Which warm'd thy soul, and hid it rest on mine!
That I, like thee, may draw from nature's page,
A poet's joy, the profit of a sage;
Like thee, may seize with impulse deep and strong,
Those magic tints that charm the heart in song!
So that my verse a power like thine may claim,
To fire mankind with Friendship's noble flame,
And teach each heart what oft thou taught'st to mine,
That love of human kind is love divine!

Forgive my tears if for his loss they flow,
The first best friend I ever lost below.&mdash;
Long shall his flock with pious sorrow mourn
The day their pastor from their souls was torn:
No pert theatric orator was he,
Nor stuff'd with pride of stern austerity;
A learn'd divine, meek, simple, and sincere,
He preach'd as if he felt our souls were dear;
His style impressive, dignified and plain,
With pow'r to strengthen faith, and guilt restrain;
He strongly felt the truths he would impart,
And speaking from the heart, he touch'd the heart!
Each word inspir'd some conscience-stirring thought,
Or warm'd our souls within us while he taught.
No wealth, no grandeur, rank, nor fashion's pride,
Had charms to draw his steady mind aside;
With equal love his people he survey'd,
Nor knew distinction but what virtue made.
When pious fears the bosom would molest,
When pain or penury would probe the breast,
His sympathising aid was ever near,
To ease the anguish, and dispel the fear:
The troubled soul saw heaven-born Mercy shine,
And felt the solace of the word divine!

Such did he live, our blessing to the end,
Our guide, example, minister, and friend!
And when his Master bade his labours close,
Triumphant on salvation's wings he rose!
And like the seer who died on Pisgah'a hill,
Though now he speaks no more, he teaches still;
Teaches from sin's alluring paths to fly,
To live like christians, and like saints to die!
His lov'd example fires each serious breast,
To live as virtuous, and to die as blest;
Makes bright religion pleasing to our eyes,
And fills our souls with ardour for the skies!

Thus ere yon golden orb that rules the day,
Withdraws from smiling earth his fading ray,
He lends a lustre to adorn the night,
And bids the gilded moon prolong the light:
She brightly sheds a glory not her own,
And light still lingers though its lord be gone!

How bright the royal heir of Israel's throne,
In thy blest cause, celestial Friendship!  shone?
When wand'ring David on his aid relied.
He cast ambition's potent claim aside;
No selfish feelings in his breast contend,
He joys to lose his crown to save his friend!
With grief he sees his father's malice rise,
And to the persecuted hero flies,
And gives the faithful signal of alarm,
Which saves the brother of his soul from harm.

And all his love in fond remembrance kept,
For Jonathan, the bard of Judah wept,
Pour'd o'er his royal harp th' elegiac strain,
And mourn'd his dearest friend in battle slain.
And when misfortune overtook his race,
He sought, he found them, drew them from disgrace;
And long to scenes, endear'd in youth, awake,
Rewards the children for the father's sake.

O!  what solicitude thy soul imprest,
What generous thirst of vengeance fir'd thy breast,
Thou highly favour'd of the Power divine,
Great patriarch!  father of the Hebrew line!
When first the mournful tale was told to thee,
Of Siddim's fight, and Lot's captivity:
Although to fighting fields unus'd, unknown,
With sudden valour now thy spirit shone!
Though kings combin'd with hosts in long array,
A warlike train, were vanquish'd on that day;
Yet fearless thou the victors would'st pursue&mdash;
Thy warriors faithful, but their numbers few,
To stand or fall, in virtue's cause engage,
And warmly glow th' unequal war to wage,
Soon join the combat with heroic fire,
While friendship and revenge their souls inspire,
And soon compel their haughty foes to yield,
Who trembling fly the memorable field!
The plunder'd substance of thy friends again,
And thy lov'd Lot, and all his captive train,
Thus nobly rescu'd by affection's sword,
To home, to love, and friendship are restor'd.

How pleas'd the hero whom fair wisdom fires,
When toil is o'er to Friendship's vale retires!
Though for a while imperious duty claim
His deeds of valour on the fields of fame;
Though honour prompts him at his country's call,
O'er her proud foes to triumph or to fall;
And though victorious in her sacred cause,
He hears assembled thousands shout applause,
And with a grateful nation's blessing crown'd,
Sees wealth and honours all his deeds surround;
Yet still he feels a purer wish arise,
Than fame, or pow'r, or grandeur e'er supplies,
A wish to know, when all his labours close,
In Friendship's shade the sweetness of repose.

Thus Scipio, conq'ror of the Punic state,
Who crush'd his country's foes, and made her great,
When ardent Romans gathering round his car,
Bore him triumphant midst the spoils of war;
With zeal transported on that glorious day,
They wish'd to clothe him with a sov'reign's sway;
The generous hero felt his soul on flame,
Borne on the wings of triumph and of fame;
But victor o'er himself, as o'er his foes,
He check'd ambition's impulse as it rose;
To wisdom's whispering voice inclin'd his ear,
Thought of sweet peace, and Lelius ever dear;
And fled from glory's car to Friendship's dell,
With Lelius and philosophy to dwell;
Rejoic'd and happy that he had for them,
Rejected Rome's imperial diadem!

In youth, when wild tumultuous passions reign,
And lead the enraptur'd pair to Hymen's fane;
Ere cautious wisdom can perform her part,
To mark esteem presiding in the heart,
Soon as the transient gust of passion dies,
When cloying charms no longer please the eyes,
The lovely goddess that our fancy drew,
Becomes insipid, and our joys untrue!
If in the conformation of her mind,
We search in vain some pleasing charm to find,
The loves and graces that adorn'd her frame,
And fir'd the heart with unresisted flame,
May still shine forth as lovely and as bright;
But, ah!  no rapture now attends the sight!
Our days pass slow and sad on life's dark stream,
Unblest by love, unbrighten'd by esteem.

But when the nuptial rite together binds
Two ardent hearts and corresponding minds;
When something more than passion's throb controls
The mutual admiration of their souls;
When in each other they enraptur'd find,
The grace of conduct, and the light of mind,
The lovely temper wisdom still attains,
The constant heart where fond affection reigns;
O!  then, when youth and vigor shall decay,
When all external charms shall fade away,
The happy pair delighted, fond, and true,
Shall feel the sweets of love forever new,
Shall see, perhaps, an offspring bless their sight,
Good, like themselves, the source of new delight!
And, O!  when generous feelings shall appear
To animate those infant bosoms dear,
What sweet emotions they shall feel the while,
And fondly watch each other as they smile!
Thus in their mutual love supremely blest,
They glide through life, and calmly sink to rest,
Their mortal parts to kindred dust return'd,
By virtue honour'd, and by friendship mourn'd!

Far from the world, retir'd to rural shades,
Where toilsome dissipation ne'er invades,
How blest the man whose peaceful days are spent,
In easy exercise, and calm content!

Who with the lark salutes the early dawn,
Breathes ruddy health from every breezy lawn,
And oft dispos'd to work the fruitful soil,
Feels dignity and pleasure in the toil!
How happy he, if in his bosom glows
A taste for social joy, and learn'd repose!
O!  then each heart-felt pleasure to endear,
Let some belov'd and faithful friend be near,
With whom to search the bright instructive page,
And wisdom learn from many an honour'd sage,
Each noble art and science to explore,
Or trace the alluring charms of classic lore,
Shall bid his leisure hours delighted flow,
And wrest the sting from every ill below.

If to invention's pleasing pow'r resign'd,
Some useful project animates his mind,
Intent on what the public good requires,
Or Friendship's more endearing claim inspires,
The plan, how wise, how rational, how just,
Full many a time is o'er and o'er discuss'd;
Then shall his watchful friend, with cautious view,
Descry the path that prudence should pursue,
And show while this a useful end may gain,
That but an idle fancy of the brain!

Produce the taper at the twilight hour,
And yield the soul to Friendship's social pow'r;
Let mem'ry there her richest stores supply,
Of song or tale to hid the moments fly;
And though the wintry tempests rage the while,
Domestic legends shall the night beguile;
Or literary taste its charms impart,
To please the fancy and improve the heart;
Or disputation's friendly power delight,
Inform the mind, and set the judgment right.

Come thou, sweet Poetry!  thou nymph divine,
And let us feel those thrilling charms of thine,
Which raise the soul terrestrial cares above,
To holy warmth, benevolence, and love!
Let Shakspeare's magic o'er the soul prevail,
Or yield a tear to Eloisa's tale;
Let Thomson's muse a patriot warmth impart,
Or sweetly flowing Goldsmith touch the heart;
Or on Miltonian wings ascend the skies,
To realms sublime, unseen by mortal eyes!
At heaven's bright throne, kneel, tremble and adore,
Or Eden's loss with sorrowing hearts deplore:
Or from the enriching philosophic strain
Of Cowper's verse, the wealth of wisdom gain;
Learn how to shape the devious course of life,
And blunt or bear its malice and its strife.
Let Scotia's peasant bard his numbers roll,
In warmth of heart, and dignity of soul;
And feel the independent throb divine,
That fires each thought and breathes in every line!

O!  bring th' immortal bard of Gaelic song,
Whose genius pours the torrent verse along,
And bids the tale of other times inspire
The heart with passion, and the soul with fire!
Fingal's great deeds excite th' heroic glow,
Who ne'er forsook his friend nor fled his foe!
But in each generous cause his might display'd,
Aveng'd th' oppress'd, and gave the needy aid!

Let Byron's lay in deep-ton'd pathos swell,
The stormy workings of the soul to tell;
And boldly spread before a wond'ring world,
Its vices broadly to the day unfurl'd!

Or should our LIVING BARDS your thoughts engage,
Whose varied strains delight th' admiring age.
Lo!  FRIENDSHIP warms them with her noblest flame;
To aid each other in the walks of fame.
Delightful concord!  holy love divine!
How blest and worthy of the sacred Nine!
What praise, what honours mark thy golden reign!
What lasting glory for the Muse's train!
Hark!  from their harps enraptur'd measures flow,
As if heaven's minstrelsy were heard below!

Oh!  hear romantic Scott recall the time,
When love was virtue, cowardice was crime;
The bard of chivalry, whose strains delight
To sing the beauteous maid, and charging knight,
With pride we see our valiant sires advance,
To storm the castle, or to break the lance!
What noble fires Fitz James's deeds awake!
How sweetly charms fair Ellen of the Lake!

Hark!  Southey, master of the potent song,
That o'er th' imagination deep and strong,
With wild emotion pours its mighty flood,
And speaks the fierce Apostate's direful mood!
What awful scenes his magic verse displays,
Kehama's curse, and Roderic's vengeful days!

And hear Montgomery's pious strains impart,
The glow of virtue to the awaken'd heart.
Whether his lays Helvetian woes record,
When freedom sunk beneath the Gaulic sword;
Or touching Javan's softer lyre to move
The youthful mind, he turns it all to love;
He ne'er forgets the muse's noblest end,
To make us feel that virtue is our friend!

Or from th' impressive strains of Campbell know
How Hope's blest visions charm the fiercest wo.
When from the wretch each blessing disappears,
His friend she lingers still, and dries his tears!
Our hearts confess, as future joys unfold,
Sweet is the tale of Hope, and sweetly told!

Now let the bard whose song in Memory's praise,
Recalls the pleasures of our former days,
Declare his joys, who can in age renew
Those scenes that strongly blest, but swiftly flew!

Oh!  if melodious Moore his harp has strung
To tones so sweet as ever poet sung,
If Erin's praise his ardent numbers tell,
Or love's own raptures in the measures swell,
Till warming beauty blushes in the strain,
And mantling pleasures o'er the senses reign;
Then from your soul all meaner cares disperse,
And riot in the luxury of verse!

Or let the muse of History relate
The world's long story, human nature's fate!
Mark bold ambition seize imperial sway,
While prostrate nations tremble and obey!
E'en feeble Xerxes holds the tyrant's rod,
With half mankind submissive to his nod.
Then mark how Freedom's spirit brightly glows,
And calls for mighty vengeance on her foes!
See Grecian virtue raise the standard high,
The proud invader and his millions fly;
For cloth'd in wrath when Freedom's sons appear,
Though few, they teach unnumber'd foes to fear;
The soul that fires them every danger braves,
Nor dreads a tyrant host compos'd of slaves!
Lo!  Tarquin humbled!  mighty Brutus see!
He grasps the sword that sets his country free;
Hark!  the dread vows that Roman souls inflame,
That burst their country's chains, and stamp her fame!

Now let Brittania's glorious tale explain,
How great Eliza bade her rule the main;
And how the noble fire of Hampden shone,
When bound to earth he heard his country groan.
Swift at his call she bursts the inglorious chain,
And with resistless force is free again!
O!  mark the wond'rous pow'rs of Chatham's soul,
That held ambitious Europe in control;
Corruption trembled at his virtuous frown,
And vanquish'd Bourbon lost the laurel crown.
See Burke!  the prince of orators arise,
Grace in his gestures, lightning in his eyes;
He beam his audience on his eagle flight,
As boldly soaring to the source of light,
He grasps a ray to fire the dubious mind,
And bids prevailing truth instruct mankind,
Proud o'er the waves, see conq'ring Nelson sweep
Each hostile banner from the subject deep!
A num'rous band of heroes by his side,
The terror of the world, their country's pride!
Lo!  Salamanca's field the wreath display,
Or dreadful Waterloo's more bloody day!
The mighty deeds by Erin's warrior done,
The scourge of tyrants, conq'ring Wellington!

But, O!  what name in history's page so bright;
Whose story gives the world such pure delight!
As his, who in Columbian wilds afar,
Where sylvan nature courts the Western star,
With steady energy to battle led
Those patriot bands who bravely fought and bled,
And like their chief, had sworn by all on high,
To conquer in their country's cause or die!
What glory crowns fair Freedom's darling son,
The boast of men &mdash; immortal WASHINGTON!

When that blest day which gives the poor man rest,
The christian Sabbath, warms the pious breast;
When holy ardours animate the mind
To leave the sordid cares of earth behind,
The soul dispos'd to rise to themes sublime,
Of God, of Heaven, and never-ending time!
O then with warm affections plac'd above,
How sweet to wander through the sacred grove,
Whose waving foliage shades the house of God,
And points the soul to her desir'd abode!
Ah!  then let Friendship hear the heart unfold
The snares she 'scap'd, the passions she controll'd,
The firm belief that prompts her views on high,
The fears that check, the hopes that bid her try.

Should restless doubt the heav'nward prospect blind,
Or grim despondency o'erwhelm the mind,
Oh!  then be Friendship's aid forever near,
To strengthen hope, and chase the pangs of fear.

Ingenious Cowper!  o'er thy troubled soul,
Long time despair possess'd a stern control:
Thy spirit felt the fast consuming flame,
And daily sunk thy melancholy frame.
In vain the pow'r of healing art was tried,
Reason and pastime were in vain applied;
Vain were the charms of taste, the smiles of love,
Nought could the anguish of thy soul remove,
Till Friendship came in reverend Unwin's form,
Reliev'd the terror, and suppress'd the storm!
The cordial balm of confidence convey'd
Peace to the mind, and all its fears allay'd;
Renew'd the frame with health, and o'er the soul
Bade Reason's pow'r resume her just control.

Sire of Creation!  when thy mighty call
Produc'd the heav'ns, and this terrestrial ball;
When heaving nature startled at thy word,
And living spirits first ador'd their Lord,
Th' eternal purpose mov'd within thy breast,
To form the race of man beloved and blest;
And pure, and good, as heav'n's own seraph band,
Our race first issu'd from thy forming hand.
To guilt, and pain, and sorrow all unknown,
God was our shield, and Paradise our own!
In love's own bow'r th' ambrosial feast was spread,
And holy angels blest the nightly bed;
Refreshing streams with soothing murmurs flow,
Soft, whisp'ring gales with balmy fragrance blow;
The fruits, the flow'rs, the music of the grove,
Tell all is happiness, and all is love!

But soon the tempter bade our bosoms swell
With vain desires, we ventur'd and we fell!
In wretched state, how helpless then we lay
Beneath heaven's wrath, that flam'd in fierce array?
Could angels save us?  could repentant tears
Arrest th' unsparing sword that justice bears?
Ah!  no &mdash; in vain e'en Pity pleads our cause:
Can she appease heaven's violated laws!
Can seraph tears indemnity provide,
For heaven insulted, Deity defied!&mdash;
But mark how bright the eternal mercy shone!
The Heir of heav'n hath made our cause his own!
Almighty power is offer'd in our stead,
And sin, and death, and hell are captive led!
Heaven's boundless love has paid the debt we ow'd,
Restor'd our souls to happiness add God!
Our songs shall hence in grateful anthems rise,
To Jove Divine, and Friendship in the skies!

When all sublunar joys and griefs are o'er,
When Nature feels her latest pang no more;
When this fair world, and yonder orbs of fire,
Shall bear th' Almighty thunder and expire!
O!  then, in realms where Hope's illusive ray,
Shall yield to joy's interminable day;
Where Mem'ry's power no feelings shall renew,
But such as spring from scenes of loveliest hue;
Where Fancy's visions never shall employ
One charm unmingled with the purest joy;
Blest Friendship ever unimpair'd shall dwell,
And with warm influence of celestial spell,
Divinely charm each sainted heart above,
And teach the sons of Heav'n immortal love!
