Where from yon hallow'd belfry's frowning height,
The misty moon looks thro' the rustling grove,
To woo the solemn shades of gloomy night,
Congenial with my troubled soul, I rove.

Beneath my feet the muttering INVER flows;
Maternal stream!  in all my sorrows dear,
What balm thy sympathizing plaint bestows,
To soothe the anguish of my grief severe!

How oft along thy solitary brink,
In musing melancholy mood I stray,
On pleasures past, and present woes to think,
Or with thy murmurs mix my plaintive lay!

How oft the owl, those sacred bowers among,
Dull brooding o'er each monumental stone,
Starts from her reverie to hear my song,
Pour'd wildly forth in sorrow's deepest tone!

Oh ye!  who dwell within yon holy gloom,
Ye honour'd ghosts of many a hoary sire!
Who now contemplate man's mysterious doom,
Wrapp'd in your viewless folds of blest attire!

How do ye love indulgent to survey,
The swelling streams of generous passion roll,
Which, tho' they drive young ardour oft astray,
Are the first pledges of a noble soul!

But how with indignation do ye burn,
To view th' unfeeling, proud, exulting throw,
Those scornful shafts that make the worthy mourn,
And give a keener edge to human wo!

Lo!  yon imploring wretch, the sport of fate,
Who oft has bled his country to defend,
Behold him spurned from guilty grandeur's gate,
Without relief, a shelter, or a friend!

Ye saints of Mercy!  say, is there no hand,
To yield one comfort to the poor man's prayer?
Of all the wealth that crowns his native land,
Dare he not claim a share &mdash; a little share!

But, ah!  the base ingratitude of man,
If aught can paint in colours justly strong,
His fate, who lies beneath yon marble, can,
Where fairy flowers collect, a fragrant throng!

Turn to yon hut the falling roof deserts,
There genius long her darling will deplore:
His country own'd him as a man of parts,
It own'd him such, but, ah!  it did no more.

Yet, though his evil fortune frown'd unkind,
Nature beheld him with a fond regard,
With noblest feelings warm, endow'd his mind,
And stamp'd him at his birth, a favourite Bard!

Here first she o'er his rude conceptions sway'd,
And by her glorious self his conduct steer'd:
Here first his infant eyes her charms survey'd,
And lovely in his eyes her charms appear'd.

Oft up yon hill to meet the rising morn,
Loose wrapt in fancy's airy garb he rov'd,
Or pondering on the world's unrighteous scorn,
Or heavenly themes sublime his bosom lov'd.

Oft by the margin of yon bank alone,
Upon his country's Harp he sang her praise;
But sadness still respir'd from every tone,
For, ah!  his country heeded not his lays!

Thus to the Indian shines the gem in vain,
The richest product of his native fields;
The tyger crushes, with regardless strain,
The loveliest flower the sylvan desert yields!

And oft beside yon hawthorn would he lie,
And watch the passing stream for many an hour,
Or musing on the wide extended sky,
Forget the scornful world, and all its power!

But soon, too soon, with rigid scorpion laws,
Would thought return to re-assert her throne;
For, ah!  the want of merit's fair applause,
No bosom felt severer than his own.

Too well his soul each impulse quick obey'd,
Keen sensibility unnerv'd his frame,
And melancholy, sweetly weeping maid,
Did all his warmth of strong devotion claim!

Now to the lonely wood or desert vale,
With lengthen'd strides, he hurries o'er the plain,
And whispers to the wind his wayward tale,
Or chaunts abrupt a discontented strain:

"Say, why did heaven, since partial is our fate,
To man his native dignity reveal?
Why give that tyrant to be rich and great,
And me this independent wish to feel?

"But I submit &mdash; Heaven cannot be in fault,
And where the mighty triumph he obtains?
I would not change one independent thought
For all the grovelling tyrant's rich domains!

"Ah!  what to me though fortune's every grace,
Wealth, pleasure, power, and splendour were my own,
Since ERIN drives me from her dear embrace,
To waste in shades, inglorious and unknown!

"How leap'd my heart, as oft her harp I strung,
And dreamt of honours that she would bestow!
But disappointment, stern the dart has flung,
That lays the fondest Bard of ERIN low."

Now far above the world's envenom'd sting,
Shade of th' enthusiastic glow divine!
Permit a youth thy former woes to sing,
Whose fate, alas!  too much resembles thine!

And let me o'er thy consecrated stone,
Pour the sad tribute of a mournful breast,
That passing worth thy sorrows may bemoan,
And virgin tears embalm thy place of rest!

THE EPITAPH.
Beneath the earth a generous youth is laid,
Whom angels lov'd, but sordid men despis'd:
Though these combin'd his merits to degrade,
With those he holds the nobler meed he priz'd.

Too meek his soul to combat with the world,
Too great to tread the servile walks of gain,
His little all was swift to ruin hurl'd,
But death soon snatch'd him from contempt and pain.

He wish'd for nought on earth beyond renown,
To which the Muses prov'd his title fair:
Whate'er his faults, they're to the grave gone down,
And undisturb'd oblivion holds them there!
