"Say, shepherd, why lov'st thou to dwell,
In a desert so lonely and wild?
Where rocks over rocks proudly swell,
In awful solemnity pil'd!

"Perhaps, in a scene so sublime,
Thou buriest the cares of thy beast;
And these hoary companions of time,
Lull thy grief-troubled passions to rest."

"Mark, Pilgrim!  this crevice below,
Yon cavern and bow'r in the vale;
There loud lamentations of wo,
Teach the echoes each night to bewail.

"'Tis a maid that was tender and fair,
As morning's first ray on the plain,
That flew to these wilds in despair,
At the death of her favourite swain.

"Young CORUN was worthy her flame,
Truth, beauty and love on them smil'd;
But her father's proud heart was to blame,
And, alas, the poor girl is my child!

"In madness she fled from our plain,
To these wilds, where her steps I pursu'd,
And I here, to watch o'er her, remain,
And supply her with garments and food.

"The cares of a fond father's heart,
Where the picture of guilt is pourtray'd,
Make me strive all I can to impart
Relief to the wounds I have made.

"To the bower, which she frantically wove,
At eve she ne'er fails to retire,
To sing of her woes and her love,
And deplore the proud heart of her sire!

"Then food to her cave I convey,
And a couch of soft rushes prepare;
And she sings in a pitiful lay,
That the ghost of her love left them there!

"But come, to the vale we'll descend,
And hide yon close willows among,
Her wild wail of woes to attend;
But, hush!  she commences her song."

"My CORUN was generous and kind,
On the Harp none so sweetly could play,
In the race he outstripp'd every hind,
And at wrestling he still won the day:

"His heart was as tender as eve
When she sheds o'er the vallies her dew;
His soul never stooped to deceive,
For the soul of my CORUN was true.

"Ye days of delight!  that are o'er,
Ye visions!  ye raptures divine!
When our souls to each other we swore;
Ye never again shall be mine!

"Fair moon!  never more thou'lt survey,
Our tender embraces of love,
As thou lead'st us along by thy ray,
Thro' the meadow, the glen, or the grove.

"O come!  dearest Shepherd!  return;
Here's a grove, here's a bow'r, we'll embrace,
In spite of their pride or their scorn;
O see!  'tis a beautiful place!

"When he comes, O ye willows be green!
Ye flowers!  let your beauties appear!
Ah whither!  he cannot be seen!
My shepherd will never be here!

"Who told my proud sire that we lov'd?
'Twas a base, 'twas a barbarous tale!
How sternly he rag'd and reprov'd!
And his hard-hearted wrath I bewail.

"The flocks of my shepherd were few,
My father's were numerous and fair,
And the Swain from the country withdrew,
A fortune, like mine, to prepare.

"Ah, stay, my dear Swain!  stay at home;
Thy worth is sufficient for me:
Ah!  why shouldst thou venture to roam,
Or trust to the dangerous sea!

"Ah, why cruel waves!  did ye rise,
The ship with destruction to hide:
O horror!  O save him!  he dies,
He is whelmed by the merciless tide!

"But his ghost every night I shall hail,
O see it, all drooping and cold!
Alas!  how dejected and pale,
Is the form that was manly and bold!

"There, he beckons me now to draw near
To the mouth of the cave where he stands:
I'll embrace him, for still he is dear,
And receive every gift from his hands!"

A fierce laugh of wildness she gave,
And hurried delirious away!
She sat in the mouth of the cave,
And call'd on her lover to stay!

The Pilgrim no more could disguise
The tempest that rag'd in his breast:
"My Lorah!  my Lorah!"  he cries,
And swift to his heart she was prest.

In soul-speaking silence, she gaz'd,
And swoon'd on a bosom so dear:
Her father stood fix'd and amaz'd,
Like Hope at the entrance of Fear!

"Bring, bring," cried young CORUN, "the flower,
That I left in the thicket behind;
Kind Angels have blest it with power,
To heal each disease of the mind!

"Lo!  now she revives from her swoon,
And reason returns to her soul,
And joy, in her heart, shall attune
The strains of soft rapture to roll!

"Blest Sage of the desolate Isle,
Thy wisdom this gift shall approve,
Whose kindness and soul-soothing smile,
Restor'd me to life and to love!

"By the rage of the rude tempest torn,
The ship had resign'd to the wave,
I, alone, on a fragment upborne,
Was held from a watery grave!

"The merciful Hermit espied,
Nor flew to relieve me in vain;
And with friendship and wealth he supplied,
The life that he snatched from the main.

"Ere he died ... for, alas he's no more,
In a grot where his corpse I should lay,
He told me was hidden his store,
And he bade me to take it away.

"And this herb, whose ambrosial juice,
Is a sov'reign remead for the mind:
'O preserve it,' he said, 'for its use,
More precious than treasures thou'lt find.'

"With tears soon, I bade him farewell,
In earth's peaceful bosom asleep:
The sails of my boat quickly swell,
And I venture again on the deep.

"How bounded my bosom with joy,
When our valley once more I beheld!
But my rapture soon met with alloy;
Your absence my rapture repell'd.

"'Twas then with this staff and these weeds,
Abroad I determin'd to roam:
Where's the home for the bosom that bleeds?
No pleasures for me were at home!

"But Love, that still governs my breast,
Conducted me hither to you:
O then we shall henceforth be blest,
And bid every sorrow adieu!"
