When first the Muses struck the lyre,
And roused the raptures of their choir,
The Poets came, enchanted round,
Rapt in the ecstasy of sound,
New tumults agitate their souls,
As music's varying torrent rolls.
Now flow'd the smooth stream from its heavenly spring
With silver sound and gentle murmuring;
Now in loud surges dashed impetuous on,
Rough in its course and thundering as it run!
The passions own the enchanting spell,
Obey its power and meet the swell,
Now Love with half-shut eye reposes
Upon a fragrant bed of roses,
And sinking in sweet languid fires,
In softest languishings expires.
And now ambition mounts his car,
Drawn by flaming steeds of war,
Fancies nation's lost and won
By his single arm alone!
Now Sorrow heaves his anguish'd throe,
Now Joy leaps wild with raptured glow;
Revenge rolls round his orbs of fire,
That seem to burst with swelling ire;
And Pity's soft cerulean eye,
Assumes a more angelic dye.
The heavenly flame the Poets caught,
And glowing with expanding thought,
The instruments they ravished from the choir,
And thus in turn they swept the sounding lyre.

First HOMER seized it and arose&mdash;
His soul with flame of genius glows;
Though dim his eye, yet far more bright
Than e'er was Fancy's plastic light,
That shone the deathless glory of his mind,
And showed both real shapes and imaged things,
The immortal host of heaven, man's various kind
And being his creative genius sings.
He tells the manners of his day,
Of shepherd kinds and distaff queens,
Great without pomp or proud array,
And heroes, though with humble means,
With softest touches o'er the harmonious strings,
Of Hector's parting tenderness he sings&mdash;
While folds his spouse the lovely star of Troy,
Close to her bosom clings the frighted boy,
Till the bright helmet fallen, he calmly hears
His father's blessing, 'mid his mother's tears!
Hark!  a louder strain
Is heard along the plain;
Achilles wrath inspires
The Poet's kindling fires.
See around the walls
Where the hero falls,
The warlike car,
Like thunder far,
In rolling terror drags along the plain,
His mangled body to Patroclus' manes slain!

List, through the Lesbian groves a plaintive sound
Blends with the music of the beauteous maids,
Who chant their soft notes through the vineyards round,
Where every mild voluptuous breeze pervades.
With sweetness sad that gives complaint a charm,
SAPPHO her long loved Phaon's coldness sighs;
She breaks her lyre, to Leucas' mount she flies,
And whelms herself into the ocean's wave&mdash;
And beauty, where it had its birth, now found its grave.

Behold the Theban PINDAR, on whose lip
The bee had left its honied sweetness,
Whose infant tongue had early learned to lisp
The nectar dews that have such fleetness,
As his hero's triumph proud,
So his strains are wild and loud,
And they dash like the courser amain,
With thundering hoof and wind-driven mane,
Rolling on, rolling on, impetuously free,
In numbers as loose as the courser can be!
The Poet on Daedalean wings
Mounts the azure height of air,
To fame's immortal temple springs
To seize the crowns that dazzle there,
And bring them for his hero's brow,
Where they'll for ever shine as now!

How different are the notes I hear!
What wanton strains assail my ear?
Behold where on a couch of flowers,
Spread in the most elysian bowers,
The soft ANACREON reposes,
Twines for his boy a crown of roses,
And binds his brow with ivy wreaths,
And fondly o'er the goblet breathes
A wanton song, then strikes the lyre,
And kindles in his veins the wild lascivious fire!

AESCHYLUS left the crimson field,
Threw down the sword he'd learned to wield,
And fierce in warlike armour clad,
With looks disordered, wild and sad,
He grasped the lyre and hastening to the stage,
Changed, for the trump of war's terrific rage,
Its silver sound, and struck a note to thrill
The inmost bosom were it e'er so chill!
See how he conjurers up his awful forms,
Dread as the midnight spirit of the storms,
That sweep in horrid masks the magic stage,
And freeze with terror or inflame with rage!

Alternate now EURIPIDES
Strikes, with his rival SOPHOCLES,
The tragic lyre, and sings a strain,
That heard upon Sicilia's plain,
Dissolves the fetters of the slave,
Or melts the fierceness of the brave,
Who, soothed by Pity's tender breathing measure,
Drops from his hand the madly quivering lance!
Or, moved by Love, falls on the lap of pleasure,
And sinks in imaged bliss and pleasing trance:
Or, when the other takes the lyre,
Burning with heroic fire,
Fights the imaginary foe,
Triumphs in carnage and in woe!

Flow the strains of sweet MENANDER,
Pure as the crystal streams meander,
But like those streams absorbed in Afric's clime,
They're sunk in th' all-o'erwhelming sands of time!
But TERENCE tasted ere they fled,
And drank at the pure fountain head.

On Tiber's banks, what notes are those,
So sweetly wafted by the breeze
That fans the grove at evening's close,
Combining sounds to charm and please?
CATULLUS, thou art fancy's child,
Fancy tender, soft and wild,
And sentiment to thee is given,
The soul-o'erwhelming thrill from heaven!

Hark!  on the MANTUAN plains, with sylvan sound,
An oaten reed delights the swains around;
Till, kindling with a more heroic fire,
The Poet took the loftier nobler lyre.
See his mild eye is raised unto the sky;
Loose flow his golden tresses to the gale&mdash;
He sings the trance of love, how lovers die,
Their mild complaint, or their heart-rending wail.
Now fiercer flames his eye &mdash; more wild his gaze&mdash;
He sings war's tumult and the battle's blaze,
The wreck of cities and the crush of realms,
Which one wide ruin in its sweep o'erwhelms!

Trembling at that trumpet's roar,
The death-knell of Rome's liberty,
When on the Macedonian shore,
The "last of Romans" closed his eye,
HORACE retired to Anio's headlong flood,
And struck his lyre along the Albunean wood;
Now with ANACREON, in lascivious play,
In myrtle chains he wantons out the day
Then bursts the silk bands and on seraph wings,
To proud sublimity with PINDAR springs!

What pensive notes along the Euxine roll?
What bosom-melting  throes are thus expressed?
What sad repinings cut the inmost soul?
What deep-drawn sighs thus heave the swelling breast?
Ah!  the poor Exile weeps his loneliness,
Driven from companionship of man and art;
Now he, whose strains were once of love and bliss,
Wails in the sadness of a broken heart!

Numerous were those who now assumed the lyre,
But yet they touched it with decreasing fire,
Till in Cimmerian darkness whelmed at length,
The soul lost fancy, and the mind lost strength;
The Muses slept &mdash; the lyre neglected long,
Breathed not the magic ecstasy of song,
Till roused at last upon Italia's plains,
It waked the slumbering music of its strains.

What heavenly language that I hear?
How soft it falls upon the ear!
How sweet it melts upon the tongue,
Into the melody of song!
With nervous hand, like those of old,
DANTE sweeps the chords as bold,
And feels the ancient flame returning;
By Virgil led and genius' light,
He plunges down the abyss of night,
Where hell's dark circles fierce are burning;
Then wafted on a seraph's mounting wings,
Up to the bowers of Paradise he springs,
And soars to realms by Fancy only trod,
The home of virtue and the throne of God!

List through the softness of luxurious charms,
The beauteous scenery of retired VAUCLUSE,
Where solitude the lover's fancy warms,
And nature's self is an inspiring Muse;
The sonnetteer, sunk in voluptuous woe,
Sings of the raptures he can ne'er enjoy,
Imagines charms he ne'er can taste or know,
Of real Laura or of fancy's toy.
He sings the triumph of all-conquering Love,
In whose long train the slaves of passion move;
How Time's dark wing broods o'er the sky of fame,
And shades the transient glimmering of our name,
And when Death's ruin has earth's centre riven,
Love so divine on earth, shall live in heaven!

Whose song is of proud knights and dames?
The fury of Orlando's flames?
Of tilts and tournaments so dear
To Paynim and to Cavalier?
'Tis ARIOSTO &mdash; see his eye,
Rolling in frenzied ecstasy,
While ever varying vision change,
Before its wild excursive range!

TASSO, touched with th' epic fire
Shed o'er the Greek and Roman lyre,
Revived the heroic song again,
That long had hushed its lofty strain.
When the hoarse clangors of hell's trumpet sound,
And shake the spacious cells of horror round,
Full rolls the verse and echoes sense resound.
So too when Tancred, in the Blessed Isle,
The pearl of virtue melts in woman's smile,
Murmurs sweet transport in the softest sighs,
And drinks in rapture from Armida's eyes!

Then on Britannia's sea-beat shore,
Where cliffs in frowning majesty
Re-echo to the billow's roar,
As whirlwinds sweep the troubled sea,
Hurl the cloud-mantle of the storm
In dark folds around its spirit's form,
Seated in view of mocking woe
And elemental rage, below,
SHAKSPEARE strikes the tragic strings,
And from the lyre those numbers flings,
That search the inmost feelings of the soul,
And melt, freeze, terrify beyond control!
See Anthony o'er Caesar sadly bend,
And deep afflicted mourn his murdered friend,
Lift the torn robe and show the gushing wound,
And call to vengeance all assembled round!
See Glo'ster's heart in life's last moment's bleed,
For Edward's murder, and ambition's meed,
When 'mid the stillness of the midnight hour,
The vengeful images around him lower!

Next MILTON "rose, his hand to try,"
Swift seized the lyre and rode sublime,
"On seraph wings of ecstasy
And passed the flaming bounds of time!"
The sapphire blaze of heaven he saw,
The involving cloud of gold withdraw,
The daring car of Christ appear,
The host seraphic glowing near!
Then sailing down the azure deep of air
In majesty of woe, saw Satan rise;
Flash at his voice the sword's revengeful glare,
That dared to threat the glory of the skies!

Boldly DRYDEN sweeps the chords,
And pours the flood of music strong;
With glowing thoughts and burning words,
He speaks the raptures of the song.
The spirit of the Mantuan bard,
Hovered o'er and smiled regard;
And waved his golden locks in pleasure,
Listening to the heavenly measure;
While o'er his cheek the blush of modest joy
With mein as kind as winning Loves employ,
He placed the laurels by the Poet worn!

Hark!  sweet warbling through the air,
The melting notes of POPE resound;
The Loves with dewy eyes smile fair,
The blue-zoned Graces dance around,
The Sylphs on silken wings arise,
Through golden clouds and beamy skies;
Their glittering robes float in the gales,
Their voices tremble through the vales,
Mild as the effulgence of an autumn's day,
Soft as the dawning of young beauty's bloom,
Sweet as the transport of love's earliest sway,
So to the soul his heavenly measures come.

THOMSON sings the varying year,
And tunes the lyre to nature's charms,
Whose image to his soul so dear,
Inspires his thought, his fancy warms,
And wakes the flame of Liberty,
That nature meant should boldly glow
In every breast, though oft it be
Damped by Oppression's chilling blow.
Thus Albion's bards with generous ardour burn,
And many came to take the lyre in turn.
At length the GENIUS of COLUMBIA rose&mdash;
Pure was her breast as Andes' deathless snows;
The noble pride of independence bold,
Her piercing eye and lofty carriage told,
She grasps the lyre which to her sons she brings,&mdash;
But hush &mdash; nor yet tell how they sweep the strings.
