Where is my friend? &mdash; I tho't I held him fast!
But yesterday, we, wandering side by side,
O'er the rough, sloping highlands blithly pass'd,
In the wild converse of poetic pride&mdash;
Marking the varied landscape spreading wide,
With many a rural scene and rustic cot,
Where Nature's sons or Nature's charms abide,
Rude as the primal race! &mdash; repining not,
No vagrant wish extends beyond their natal sport.

But cheerful as their sires have lived and died,
Contentedly they pass a life obscure,
Amid the wild scenes on the mountain's side&mdash;
Themselves as wild, as simple, and as pure;&mdash;
To them ambition holds no witching lure,
Nor wealth excites an avaricious flame;
In nature's bodeless ignorance secure,
Their father's merit is their highest aim&mdash;
Their father's ancient cottage, all they wish to claim.

Yes, Sheys, with thee but yesterday I stray'd
O'er Rockaway's romantic, upland vale,
Where many a scene sublime our course delay'd,
And oft we paus'd to bear the rustic's tale,
Or list the roar of waters on the gale;
While fancy, all enraptur'd, gazed and smil'd,
O'er the inspiring view, which could not fail
To wake the song of genius' favour'd child,
And rudely thou didst pour thy numbers warm and wild.

From the rough mountain's brow, with slow descent,
Leaping from rock to rock in sportive play,
Along thy shores, rude Rockaway, we went,
In social observation, blithe and gay,
Tuning at times the voluntary lay;
Or climbing the steep cliff in curious mood,
To mark thy wild, uneven, winding way,
And there awhile in contemplation stood,
Gazing upon the grandeur of thy foaming flood!

But who can pencil the stupendous scene,
Where from the precipice the waters pour&mdash;
All wildly rushing the huge rocks between,
Plunge foaming, breaking, jarring, thundering o'er,
And lash the torturing crags with angry roar;
Now wheeling in one hoary sheet along,
As tho' indignant of their narrow shore;
Now gathering in a current fierce and strong,
Struggling, they darkly wind, the clifts obscure among.

There, in romantic grandeur, o'er the deep,
The promontory cliff sublimely bends;
Here, slow receding, the umbrageous steep,
Abrupt, in gay theatric form ascends,
Towers in the rear and with the mountain blends,
Or from its brow by Nature's hand unfurl'd,
Gently declines, and thro' the vale extends;&mdash;
There, pile on pile the massy rocks are hurl'd,
Like the rude, gather'd fragments of a ruin'd world.

And shall such charms of Nature lie unsung?
O, Booneton!  Booneton! &mdash; Lovely vale retir'd;
Is there no Bard, thy mountain sons among,
With Nature's warm enthusiasm fir'd,
Upon thy cataract to gaze inspir'd,
And, like the genius of the mountain tide,
Sing his wild numbers &mdash; by the world admir'd,
Rude as the scene he laves &mdash; as free from pride&mdash;
His soul as nobly bold &mdash; his accents as untied.

In full sublimity, the Poet's eye
Beholds Niagara's mighty torrent flow,
As rushing furious from its bed on high,
It pours a deluge on the world below!
Or turning, ses like drifting clouds of snow,
O'er awful rocks Passaic burst away;
But Booneton, less sublime, can more bestow,
Of beauteous scenery picturesque and gay,
Where the romantic eye may long unwearied stray.

Nor lacks there story for this lovely spot:&mdash;
The sympathetic Bard may truly tell,
(For generous deed should never be forgot,)
How from the giddy height Eliza fell,
Down!  down!  she sunk!  and with a rushing swell
The tide collaps'd!  and smooth, and waveless died!
While from the shore loud burst the frantic yell:&mdash;
She's gone!  she's gone! &mdash; united voices cried!&mdash;
She's gone!  the echoing rocks in hollow wail replied.

Then brave Doremus, from the shelving steep,
With nature's true philanthropy of heart,
Plung'd in the whirling basin of the deep,
And all again was still!  With anxious start,
They who remain'd rush on!  The waters part!
Clasping the maid, amidst the surges' roar
Doremus rose, and with opposing art,
Beating the waves, magnanimously bore
His lovely, drooping prize, triumphant to the shore!

O, Booneton!  in thy sweet vale, where peace resides!
Could my heart claim a spark of Genius' fire;
Full oft should bear me on its upland sides,
While echoes warbled to my mountain lyre,
Sweeping the wild notes from its trembling wire;
Or wandering oft thy rushing stream along,
The scenes sublime should many a strain inspire,
And in rude minstrelsy thy hills among,
I'd pour thy native grandeur in the tide of song.
