Hail!  land of the breezy vale, and verdant hill,
Land of the range in grand confusion pil'd!
Land of the glitt'ring flower and babbling rill,
Land!  land, where Nature's lore inspires her child!
Land!  o'er whose downs, compress'd and fiercely wild,
No crushing tempest's gather'd breathing flies;
Land of warm hearts!  by minstrelsy beguil'd,
Of mellow cheeks and most bewitching eyes!
Hail!  land of pancakes, peace, fair maids, and pumpkin pies!

The mournful murm'ring of the distant fall,
The tinkling sheep-bell heard at close of day!
The free-born rustic's far-resounding call&mdash;
The hamlet maidens' joyous roundelay!
The dripping wreathe flung loose o'er bosom gay,
The simple grandeur and the modest grace;
The picturesque sublime of mountain grey,
All, all meek nature loves or art may trace,
Is thine, romantic land!  home of a noble race!

Oh!  bless the soil where pumpkin earliest grew,
Rearing his tubes, transparent, round, and green!
Displaying his luscious globes of golden hue,
To make us weep for very joy I ween!
Hail!  guiltless monarch of the rural scene,
May freemen own no higher earthly king;
Shielded by grey-beard custom's mighty screen,
May power protect thee from each creeping thing,
And Morris boast her pies, while Time can flap a wing!

Ah, me!  how strange it seems that man should sigh,
And bow, in motionless despair, his head!
When he might build him towers of pumpkin pye,
Pour floods of cherry sparkling, bright and red!
Might, with dry hickory, firm and dense as lead,
Against Misfortune barricade his door;
Might honey strew where Envy's talons tread,
With buckwheat cakes might pave his parlour floor,
Then fright Care's rav'ning brood with stubborn, merry roar!

For, why should thou, sweet mortal, gentle born!
Repine, and fret, and inly rave, and 'plain,
That Earth's o'erspreaded loveliness at morn&mdash;
Fame's towering plume, or Wealth's long-sweeping train,
Are not thine own?  Oh feeble moth refrain!
Contented buzz thy little hour &mdash; and die!
Heaven's boons are thine &mdash; fair health with lucid brain,
Angelic Virtue's placidness of eye,
More, more can Love bestow?  could Envy more deny?

But stay my Muse!  Ah thou hast wept so long,
That like cross miss, whom nothing may delight,
Nursing the tear-drops on thy cheek of song,
When no just cause presents, thou'rt sad for spite!
Return &mdash; and leave, for some congenial wight,
The moral strain that glistens with a tear;
To mourn is good &mdash; to sympathize is right,
And yet, the heart should sometimes quaff her cheer,
While Mirth and Fancy laugh their tales of triumph here!

Oh!  land of courtships, conclaves, clover, cream!
(Alliteration &mdash; how it oils a line!)
May never Slander from thy hill-tops scream,
Nor modest merit in thy vallies pine!
For thee may foaming seas of cider shine&mdash;
Their waves careering o'er each happy soul;
Thy native scutcheon be a pumpkin vine,
An ear of corn, a fiddle, pipe, and bowl,
A stag's broad antler arch'd &mdash; a spinning wheel and goal!

Romantic land!  neglected and remote,
How much of genius, much of virtue strays,
With him whose fearless lyre flings wild its note,
While Nature answers in a voice of praise!
Ye varied scenes!  unstudied as his lays!
Ye mirror'd lakes!  ye woodlands scatter'd lone!
(One, one true bard your native charms shall raise,)
Inspiring, echo ev'ry forceful tone,
Columbia!  clasp thy Graham, and hail him for thine own!

Within the bosom of some willow'd glen,
Where azure smoke fantastic wooes the breeze,
Secure from all the specious wiles of men,
Her pride to smile, her business but to please.
How many a maid, in nature's winning ease,
Her dark eyes lit by innocence and joy!
Dwells, lovely land!  among thy bowers of peace,
Trips o'er thy lawns, as gentle prudence coy,
And knows, nor seeks to know, but rural life's employ!

How many a youth, whose warmly gen'rous heart,
Might speak the Tragic Muse's burning lore;
Or breath rich numbers of that wizard art,
Which can proud freedom's drooping soul restore!
Now roams, oh Morris!  the stupendous shore,
Where Booneton's mighty world of waters brawls;
And lists, unconscious, that his plaudits pour,
The dreadful music of its hundred falls!
Enraptur'd bares his breast, and on their guardian calls!

But, while his vision rides on heaven's bright bow,
Some carping eye in cold surprize is bent;
While his glad cheeks with thought unearthly glow,
Rude, cruel rail'ry to his soul is sent!
The kindly mantle of his bosom's rent,
Blind, limping Fortune!  by thy spiky wing:
But Minstrel!  hug thy fate, be blithe and blent&mdash;
Thy magic lyre shall hills of forage bring,
While platter, bowl, and knife, the mirthful chorus ring!

Oh, Fortune!  in thy gaudy-suited courts,
With gems o'erstudded &mdash; rife of goodly cheer;
Where titled Ignorance with Pride resorts,
Where gilded Dullness frowns upon the peer!
Why, why must Genius stand aloof and hear?
Sing his sweet paeans to wintry rain?
Then, shrink unreck'd, in penury and fear,
And where his mind was nurtur'd, aye remain,
No heart to share his joy &mdash; no hand to soothe his pain!

Oh, Morris!  Morris!  Land she loves right well,
Her mountain harp enwrapt in mournful guise;
As pilgrim clad, Columbia's muse shall tell,
And weeping point, where low thy minstrel lies!
On his lone grave ye flowers uncultur'd rise&mdash;
There, there ye doves!  impart your tender lore!
There, float ye symphonies of earth and skies!
There patrons of the lyre!  this line explore,
"Stranger!  his honest heart was never cold before!"
