Again upon his weary pilgrimage
Time through another rolling year hath sped&mdash;
Hath chilled the purse of slow consuming age,
And blanched with silver gray the aged head:
How swift the eagle pinioned hours have fled
Thro' Spring's fair birth and Summer's placid sheen,
And waved their wings above the Autumn's bed,
Where ruin's mantle overspreads the scene,
That was so beautiful, so gay and green!

Man!  come, and look upon the faded leaf,
Impressive emblem of thine own decay&mdash;
How like the sad and pallid cheek of grief
It falls to earth, and pines, and fades away!
Where breathes the man to whom it doth not say,
That such is his inevitable doom,
When the warm light of life shall cease to play,
And the fair flowers of life shall cease to bloom
For him whose lonely mansion is the tomb.

There is a moral in this dead repose
Of blighted nature &mdash; such is man's career&mdash;
His spring hath all the freshness of the rose,
Fair laughs the morn of his awakening year,
Gemmed by the happy smile, the joyous tear:
And wouldst thou know how fares his wintry hour!
Oh, look around behold the earth appear,
Divested of each shrub and scented flower
That once adorned her blooming summer bower.

Image of sorrow, parent of the storms,
Relentless winter! &mdash; can the spirit gaze
Upon the tempest which thy face deforms,
And think not on that season of his days,
When the melodious whisperings of praise
No longer on his ear delighted fall&mdash;
When pleasure's smiles and fancy's winning lays
No more to rapture can his heart recall,
Wrapped in the deep dark folds of sorrow's pall?

Who hath not felt his heart enraptured swell,
As love hath lightened up in beauty's eye!
Who hath not owned the witchery of that spell
That binds the soul to beauty's gentle sigh?
Who hath not felt the winged moments fly
By in early life sinless and undefiled,
When not a cloud obscured the tranquil sky,
In that fond hour so exquisite and wild,
When first to win his heart affection smiled?

And who hath seen those blessed moments fade
Beneath misfortune's deadly withering!
And who hath borne the pang of hope betrayed,
Nor felt that life had no severer sting?
Not e'en though fate her darkest sorrows bring,
Spreading black midnight o'er the troubled mind,
Can they compare with that deep sorrowing,
When youth first wakens from his dream to find
That the warm sun of rapture hath declined.

And when the shock is past, the heart survives,
To bear the sterner evils of its fate;
Yet still the busy fiend of memory strives
To catch joy from the past, &mdash; but all too late:
Never, oh never, can the mind create
Hours of delight like those which thus have flown;
Never such blissful scenes reanimate,
At those enchanted moments which have gone,
Leaving the spirit desolate and lone!

Often, oh Time, thou desolating power!
Such scenes along thy varied course have swept&mdash;
Love's paradise, and Hope's ethereal hour,
When every fear and every grief have slept;
And as upon thy pathway thou hast kept
Thy ceaseless tenor, thou hast seen the blight
Of changeful fortune &mdash; and how main hath wept
Over the requiem of lost delight,
When round him gathered wild affliction's night.

Oh!  many a time and oft the heart hath bled,
When at the closing moments of the year,
It rouses on the blessings which have fled,
And left it lingering and lonely here;
What fairy scenes to memory's eye appear
In all the freshness of their early pride,
The withered hopes which can no longer cheer&mdash;
The joys which glanced along life's rapid tide&mdash;
The raptures once imparted, now denied?

Yet why lament o'er joy's expiring ray?
It sets &mdash; clouds gather o'er &mdash; yet on their verge
A golden halo sparkles brightly gay,
And meteors flash along life's heaving surge!
It boots thee not to pour the plaintive dirge,
Thou sad in heart, for what can bloom no more&mdash;
Be thine the fortitude that dares to urge
Its path without repining, to that shore
Where all its fearful trials shall be o'er.

What mighty deeds have marked the flight of Time!
What nations founded!  and what glory won
By the fair light of liberty sublime!
Such as illumed ensanguined Marathon,
And such as shone upon our Washington,
The first of heroes &mdash; for he drew the sword,
Not to obtain the bauble of a throne,
But to protect the country he adored
'Gainst Europe's tyrant hosts which on it poured.

And well he fought &mdash; and well he won the meed
Of that pure glory which can never die,
Which wreathes the fame of him who dares to bleed,
And yield without regret his latest sigh,
When o'er his head, his country's banners fly,
And valour sounds the trump of victory:
Oh, one free spirit could a host defy,
When it unsheathes the sword of Liberty,
And vows to perish nobly, or be free!

Wither ye laurels of proud Philip's son!
Your leaves re dripping with unhallowed dew,
The tears of human kind &mdash; though Macedon
Did idolize their brilliancy of hue,
Yet 'twas a brightness cheating and untrue&mdash;
His tread was on the prostrate neck of earth
To kill &mdash; to desolate &mdash; and to subdue
The soul of freedom struggling into birth,
Without whose charms life were of little worth.

Yea, he pursued triumphantly his path,
And Asia bowed beneath the victor's away,
Hung on the smile, and trembled at the wrath
Of a frail fellow being of the clay.
What was the close of this all boasted day?
How set this sun which shone so splendidly,
And brooked no equal orb to cross its way?
How passed from earth this would-be deity?
In an inglorious death midst drunken revelry.

And thou, imprisoned in the sea-girt isle,
Gaul's daring champion!  what, in sooth, art thou
With all thy high emprize and gallant toil,
Sparkles the diadem upon thy brow;
Doth Europe bend beneath thy sceptre now?
No &mdash; thy adventurous eagle doth not soar
As erst it did, and left earth far below
His wing is weak and can outspread no more&mdash;
The lily now outshines the tri-color.

Such ever is the changeful lot of man:
Frail as the dew that glitters in the beam;
A while he hustles through his narrow span,
Then sinks beneath oblivion's idle stream:&mdash;
His joy is but the phantom of a dream,
Clothed in unreal splendour, falsely bright;
And he who wields the sword of power supreme,
Who boldly soars in glory's proudest flight,
Sinks down in ruin from his lofty height.

So hath it been: &mdash; again, so shall it be
With the fond schemes of this uncertain sphere,
Till time shall end in vast eternity,
And cease to roll around the varied year:
The morning dreams of hope &mdash; the pensive tear&mdash;
The smile of joy &mdash; and valour's waving plume&mdash;
The wreath of love, to youth and beauty dear,
Shall still the destiny of map illume,
Until he makes his home within the tomb.
