The ball was o'er: &mdash; gay Fashion's weary train,
Well pleased, their homes and drowsy beds regain.
Ellen and Jane, whom two fond sparks admire,
To their joint couch with fluttering hearts retire;
But ere, in sleep, their heavy eyelids close,
Thus scan the merits of their favourite beaux.

ELLEN.
My Henry's foot is formed in beauty's mould;
Small, slender, straight, delightful to behold.
His silken hose and glossy shoe so neat
Should Turkey carpets tread, and not the street.

JANE.
My William's hand is like a lady's, small,
White as the snowy flakes that gently fall;
Softer than silk; and, oh!  ye powers divine!
How sweetly thrilling, when it touches mine!

ELLEN.
Parted before is Henry's glossy hair;
Combed and Macassar'd with the nicest care,
When he emerges from his tailor's hands,
Padded and stuff'd as elegance demands,
And tightly laced in Cantellotic stays,
A form more true no slender wasp betrays.

JANE.
Fine flaxen curls adore my William's head;
His cheek presents the purest white and red;
His dimpled features wear a constant smile;
His soft blue eyes to melting love beguile;
His shape, his air, his gait, all, all conspire,
To make him just the darling I admire.

ELLEN.
In finest linen is my Henry seen,
White as the snow, and every morning clean:
Like paper stiff, the well starched collars rise,
Embrace his ears, and mount above his eyes.

JANE.
My William's collar does his chin enclose,
And shoots six inches forward of his nose,
I know he changes collars twice a day;
But that he wears a shirt, I cannot say.

ELLEN.
Some beaux wear cravats red, and some wear blue;
My Henry's cravat is of emerald hue.
When thus attired, he to my view displays
A stiff neck bandaged with good warm green baize.

JANE.
Red, blue, or green, let other dandies buy;
My William's cravat is of yellow die.
When first I viewed him in that neckcloth drest,
I laughed outright, and thus the beau addrest:
"Hast thou purloined, to cure a swollen throat,
Thy mother's yellow flannel petticoat?"

ELLEN.
My Henry smokes tobacco, &mdash; snuffs and chews;
With Otto and Cologne his dress imbues;
Drenches with lavender his kerchief white,
And squanders every perfume of delight;
Till from the man united scents exhale,
Rich as the ripeness of a rabit's tail.
Not more refreshing are the gusts that pop
From the oped door of Pestle's physic shop;
Or the blest odours, that elastic stray
From blended musk and assafoetida.

JANE.
William sips punch, of Irish whiskey made,
Or that compound of rum and lemonade;
Orri, famed root, (not vile tobacco) chews,
And with its sweets his balmy breath imbues.
Let poets feign, or voyagers attest,
The spicy gales of Araby the blest;
Let the brown maids, whose hands, inured to toil,
Rear savoury bulbs in Weathersfield's rich soil,
Boast that no perfume, Asia yields us, matches
The redolescence of their onion patches.
Not blest Arabia's aromatic gales,
Not the strong odours which the leek exhales,
Are half so rich in redolence divine,
As Williams orris'd lips, when pressed to mine.

A shoeless step now shakes the sounding floor!
The father's knuckle strikes the sounding door:
"Hush, girls!" &mdash; he cries; &mdash; "no more these vigils keep;
But hold your noisy tongues, and go to sleep."
