The town's clock note proclaims the close of day;
The wearied trader trudges to his tea;
Loud-rattling carts roll o'er the dusky way;
And leave the gaol, to wretchedness and me.

Now fade the city's splendours on the sight,
And all my walks a gloomy silence wear;
Save when the turnkey bars the gate for night,
And melancholy gratings wound my ear.

Save that from yon dark corner of the street,
The shiv'ring watchman sounds the dread alarm,
Of rogues, that plotting round his secret seat,
Awake the oft-felt thunders of his arm.

Within this smoke-dried pile's eternal shade,
Where clustering rooms discordant plaints unite,
Each on his bed by no fair hands array'd,
The hapless prisoners close their tortur'd sight.

The rap of early milk-maid, and the choir
Of sweep-boys chatt'ring up the brick-built steep;
The noise of servants, and the crackling fire,
No more arouse them from the joys of sleep.

For them no more the well-deck'd parlour smiles;
Or garnish'd dishes smoke, with envied fare;
Nor hungry rovers urge unheeded wiles,
With the full plate their glistening eyes to share.

Oft did the beef-steaks to their sharp steel yield;
Their might has oft the limbs of turkeys broke;
How conqueror-like, the goblets did they wield!
How sunk the cider as their senses spoke.

Let not cold pride, that gladden'd at their cheer
Despise them now when feasts and favours fail;
Nor new-rais'd Grandeur, with impatience hear,
The sad and sickening annals of the gaol.

The boast of states, Corruption's deadliest foe,
And all whom Genius, all whom Truth inspires
Alike may feel Misfortune's riving blow,
Quench'd in a prison's gloom their blazing fires.

Nor you, ye philanthropic, deem it strange,
That ne'er their story to the wide world strays,
Where Rumour's light-heel'd troop incessant range,
To blast with infamy or deck with praise.

Can Pity's sigh, or all the charm of Wit,
Back to their homes, these sons of debt restore?
Can Sympathy efface the parchment writ?
Or Eloquence unhinge the prison door?

Perhaps in this abhorred spot's confin'd,
Some mind once panting for the heights of power,
Hands &mdash; that a glossy bank-note might have sign'd,
Or on the needy pour'd the silken shower.

But ocean to their eyes, the smart trim'd sail,
Rich with the spoils of commerce ne'er did bear,
A capturing foe or devastating gale,
Dispers'd the golden visions of the year.

Full many a guinea sparkling from the fire,
The deep untravers'd chests of Avarice bear,
Full many a strain of Pity's melting lyre,
Is wasted on its cold and tuneless ear.

Some patient honest spirit that pursued,
Nought but just gain, thro' labyrinths of trade,
Some wild adventurer, here may sue for food;
Or gamester, vainly ask his dice's aid.

Fast, from the world, by massive bolts secur'd,
Their sunless limbs have never learn'd to stray;
Within this damp, unwholesome air immur'd,
They drag the painful minutes of the day.

Yet from Oblivion's grave, their fame to guard,
Descriptive carvings on some mouldy post,
Perhaps the rhymings of a shoeless bard,
Proclaim around the gaoler's plague or boast.

Coarse charcoal drawings on these cobweb'd walls,
The place of finish'd portraitures supply;
And, as the mind a well-known face recalls,
Fill with Compassion's flood, the passing eye.

For who to stern Misanthropy a prey,
The sweets of Fame and Friendship e'er resign'd?
Left the bright scenes of Freedom blithe and gay,
Nor cast one anxious, wishful look behind?

Round his lov'd friends, the trembling captive clings,
Their fond remembrance, asks his last embrace;
Ev'n here, his baffled spirit prunes its wings;
Ev'n here, some budding vanity betrays.
