The sun had sunk behind the wood-crown'd hills
That hang o'er Derby's sunken glens below;
Where Housatonic's chiming streamlet trills
Along its pebbly bed in lulling flow;
Dazzling and brilliant was the solar glow
When bright Apollo's beams lay on the wave,
Like youth's fond raptures; ere the midnight woe
Of doubt and sorrow chills the streams that lave
His throbbing heart, and throw their ice around his grave.

Dim fading hues of fluctuating light
Now faintly ting'd the sapphire-circled sky,
Dwelling in twilight on the cloud-capp'd height,
Like half forgotten bliss on memory's eye;
While, perch'd amid the dusky foliage nigh,
Sung the sad, lovely, lonely whip-poor-will,
Breathing her plaints and mingling with a sigh
The melting music, that o'er dale and hill
Rose on the ear of grief, o'ermastering sense of ill.

Still was the scene &mdash; by platted leaves embower'd,
It lay in lovely solitude, and seem'd
A spot on which the hand of heaven had shower'd
That melancholy loveliness, ever deem'd
By galliards and buffoons, who never dream'd
Of ought save bagnios, billiards, and wassail,&mdash;
A demon curse, by fiends of malice schem'd
In fellest mood; but which all souls will hail
As heaven's aurora-guide through earth's dark lowly vale.

Wrapt in those musings, that the poet knows
To be the wings on which his spirit soars
To viewless spheres, above terrestrial woes,&mdash;
Above the gulf, down which dark misery pours
The tributary streams of guilt &mdash; that roars
With hollow groans of agony, despair,
Along those peaceful, solitary shores&mdash;
I gazed, and thought on scenes more purely fair
Beyond the visual glance, but open unto prayer.

In visionary pleasures tranced, the hours
Unheeded flew in silent lapse along,
Till not a sound from woodland moonlight bowers
Wak'd slumbering Night with softly-warbled song,
Dark-hooded goddess!  aye too oft belong
Silence and sorrow to thy sable reign;
And lone hearts, writhing with the sense of wrong,
Too oft thy coverts seek, with torturing pain,
And muse on scenes that rack and madden mortal brain.

Reclined in solitary mood upon
The velvet mead, and reading every star
That gleam'd along the welkin's girding zone,
A strain of sorrow, low, and sweet, and far,
Dispell'd my reverie &mdash; for the yellow car
Of night's fair empress seem'd to pause, that she
Might drink the music.  Leaning on the bar
Of a rude fence, I listened 'neath a tree,
To catch the strain that flowed so sad, so witchingly.

Soaring, sinking, dying, dead,
The flaming orb of day hath gone;
Lovely, thrilling, lost, and fled,
Every joyous smile, and tone
Of hope and love,
Of peace and bliss,
On earth below, or heaven above,
Hath found the dark abyss!
Oh!  man need not tell me his sweet lying tale,
For there's feeling and truth in misery's tale.

Smiling, hoping, blessing, blest,
Life opens on pure innocence;
Bright, caressing and carest,
Flow the joys of being thence.
But fiends attend
In fairy guise,
And in the fawning, sembling friend
Lie luring spells, and cheating lies;
The bright sun hath sunk to arise in the morn,
But the sun of my bosom can never return.

Longing, trembling, fainting, lost,
On heaven I turn my swollen eye;
Placid, purely, on my tost
And wildered mind, smiles yon pale sky;
It mocks my soul,
And tells me, sin
Bars my bright path to glory's goal
That crime can never enter in.
Though awful be death, yet more awful is life,
And nature must sink in the pitiless strife.

Ceased the sad strain.  The hanging woods around
In darker shades their dun recesses veil'd,
Yet lingering echo wooed the lonely sound,
That on the ear in notes so melting wail'd;
Had the seducer heart it &mdash; wretch impal'd
By bigot, or fanatic, would have grasp'd
The torturing rack, to which his heart was nail'd,
And smiled as he the fatal engine clasp'd,
Ere he would hear lost innocence detail the guilty past.

That raving maniac &mdash; oh, it is a tale
At which e'en angels might once deign to weep,
I cannot tell &mdash; but once that visage pale
Was lit with rosy hues carnation'd deep;
That shrivell'd form &mdash;  no human eye could sleep
While it before the glowing vision shone&mdash;
Was once the pride of beauty, and did keep
The love and awe that loveliness had won,
Till one sad hour &mdash; 'tis past &mdash; it cannot be undone.

But may terrific shadows throng thy brain,
And vengeance torture, never to destroy;
Thy life be one unvaried path of pain,
And black despair envelope every joy
That smiles around thee &mdash; may each brute annoy
Thy writhing soul, seducer fell!  And nigh
May pleasures play, that thou may'st deeply cloy
Thy appetite; the hell-cup may'st thou drink, and die
The lingering, torturing, ceaseless death of all eternity!
