Come, maid of pensive mien!  and let us stray,
To where yon moss-grown croslet rears its head;
Where chants the village choir the holy lay,
Or artless requiem, o'er the humble dead.

Here round this fane, the sons of Toil repose,
Here many a sweet and beauteous maiden lies,
And waving o'er her head, the blooming rose,
Blushes unseen, sheds all its sweets, and dies.

Here will we hark the curfew's solemn knell,
Whose broken measures load the fitful gale,
Whose deep-toned strokes Sol's parting tinges tell,
And mark how Evening's russet shades prevail.

And in its dreary pauses, weep the bard,
Whose plaintive strains sad flow'd at Nature's call;
Whose dorian song has known the village yard,
And taught to weep the lowly peasant's fall.

Then lead to Gallia's richly varied clime,
Where Nature's graces gloomy grandeurs hail;
'Midst tott'ring cliffs, with shades o'erhung, sublime
Of mountain lineage, tow'ring o'er the vale.

And on yon sombre mountain's pine-clad head,
Flit in the deep and hollow gusts that blow:
Teach me to list, by thy sweet impulse led,
The mad'ning torrents dash o'er rocks below.

Thy chilling shadow's mantle o'er my soul,
Add tenfold darkness to the mazy dells;
Where moan the winds, or through the vallies roll,
And 'midst her secret caverns Echo dwells.

Or lov'st thou best, when midnight silent reigns,
To roam beneath the cloister's roof emboss'd;
When painted moon-beams dance beneath the panes,
And in the organ's peal the soul is lost.

Yes!  sure thou dwell'st in yon dark antique pile,
The blest asylum of the wounded mind;
Where frowning Silence blasts the budding smile,
And every worldly coil is left behind.

But ah!  why seek thee in such scenes as these,
'Midst Pleasure's vot'ries art thou frequent found;
Pluck but the mask adorn'd with smiling ease,
The tear repress'd, and frequent sighs abound.

Though Pleasure's roses strew our path,
And Mirth her airy phantoms bring:
The sigh succeeds the boisterous laugh,
And roses leave their thorns to sting.

Though Gayety awhile, the heart
Rule with bright-ey'd Wit and Folly;
'Tis thine to bid them quick depart,
Pensive, pleasing, Melancholy.

'Tis thine, the pencil silently that plies,
To vision sketching scenes of darkest gloom;
Smiling to hear, and list'ning to despise,
Thou point'st with forward eye, the awful tomb.

Thou too presid'st in Science' mazy bow'r,
'Twas thou who taught the venerable sage,
In Study's cave at sacred midnight hour,
"Man still is Sorrow's child, in every age"

Affection's warmth to cheer the soul extends,
And weaves her beauteous web with fingers fine;
But ah!  soon fate or chance, the texture rends,
Obscures its hues, and leaves the victim thine.

Repose from thee not Virtue's self can know,
Nor Beauty, Honour, can a respite boast;
But oft 'neath woes they faint and cheerless grow,
And fly to realms amid the starry host.

And mortal!  if at Pleasure's throne thou bend,
And Pleasure deign her balmy dews to pour;
Think not; &mdash; for soon the brighten'd visions end,
If but thou giv'st to thought one passing hour.
