EDMUND, WALTER, AND FINHAH.
SCENE &mdash; A PLEASANT FOREST ABOUT THREE MILES FROM A VILLAGE. &mdash; TIME &mdash; AN AUTUMN MORNING.

WALTER.
This is an early hour, but we shall find,
While sluggards doze, he rises with the sun.

EDMUND.
The good old man, so aged, yet so strong,
And yet, I wonder, Walter, he should live
So like a hermit, in this wood, alone.
I've heard strange stories told that brought him here.
Some say &mdash; he hath been cross'd in early love,
That he his rival slew, and felt remorse.
Others &mdash; that midnight studies hurt his brain.
Some &mdash; that mistaking zeal urged secret penance.
Our parson thinks him a philosopher,
Who came to give his thoughts a wider range.
His maiden sister shrugs, and, looking wise,
Says &mdash; wizards take the shape of holy men.
But all esteem him wond'rous learn'd and kind.

WALTER.
There, Edmund, look &mdash; do not you see him now,
'Neath the large rock that juts above his cell?
He watcheth how the glorious sun doth rise,
How calm he looks, and leans upon his staff,
How white his bowing shoulders with his locks,
And gray his reverend beard &mdash; yet fresh his cheeks.
Divine old man!  death shows respect to thee,
And in thy presence I should feel no harm.

EDMUND.
See &mdash; now he beckons with his palsied hand,
And forward moves &mdash; fast as his years permit.
We joyous greet thee, venerated Sire.

FINHAH.
Draw near, my sons. &mdash; Although I live retired,
I love to have young friends come visit me,
And, in my cell, partake what Nature gives.

EDMUND.
Heaven bless thee, Father, healthful in thy years
Thy speech and mien are not like rustic swains.
Prey tell us all thy life's long history.

WALTER.
And how, so aged, thou canst health sustain,
In this lone forest, where men rarely come?

FINHAH.
View me about, my sons, and mark my change.
How few can tell the pains of eighty years.
Yet half those years were spent among these trees.
See those two yews, that shadow o'er my cell?
They grew since I came here &mdash; I set the slips&mdash;
Two gloomy trees, and so I love them more,
For I am sorrowing, and can mourn with them.

In youth &mdash; and ye'll  not count an old man vain?&mdash;
I trimm'd the wakeful lamp, and fledg'd for song.
I sung of Man. &mdash; How this delves mines of lore,
While that, in wars, wears laurels stain'd in blood.
How one, to either zone, whitens the sea,
And, on the reeling shrouds, sings to the storm;
Another, risks, on fluttering wings, to rest
High, on the windy, slippery dome of Fame,
And how the wheel revolves, and scale depends,
And furrow turns, that man may sumptuous live,
How some though slaving, starve &mdash; some idle, feast,
How men oft chide their Fates &mdash; themselves in blame.
I sung the sister Arts, all hand in hand,
I Virtue praised, and pointed where she led.
My Muse was humble &mdash; but was all to me.
At last, my friends all died &mdash; all died save one&mdash;
And he &mdash; I thought him friend &mdash; but spare the dead
Betray'd my charge, and all my fortunes wreck'd.
Oh!  'twas too much! &mdash; that he, to whom I gave
The keys of all my heart &mdash; Oh!  it stung deeply.&mdash;

Unfriended by the world, I fled from men.
Long, poor, disguised, in comfortless despair
I wander'd, till at last I rested here.
With many a sun, have I, in quest of food,
Travers'd the thickset woods, and oozy bogs,
And up the hillock's brow, and down the dell,
For game, and fish, and nuts, and roots, and fruits,
And, for the winter, gather'd autumn stores.
I trap, and hook, the hare, and bream, and thrush,
And line my cell with moss, and yellow leaves.
At morn, I kneel &mdash; at eve, I hymn my praise.
Love virtue, and you cannot die too young.
Wisdom old Finhah sought too late &mdash; but found!

WALTER.
I love thee, Father, and am loath to leave thee.

EDMUND.
Nor will we e'er forget thy various years,
Thy studious youth, and patriarchal age.

FINHAH.
Farewell, dear virtuous youths, a long farewell!
For Finhah's very old, and something tells,
That when ye come again, ye may not find me here.
