I sing the Oven &mdash; glowing, fruitful theme,
Happy for me, that mad Achilles found,
And weak Ulysses erst, a servile bard,
That deign'd their puny feats, else lost, to sing.
And happy that Aeneas, feeble man!
Fell into hands of less emprise than mine,
Too mean the subject for a bard so high.
Not Dante, Ariosto, Tasso, dar'd
Task their gross minds with theme so sublimate,
Nor he, Dame Nature's master-journeyman,
Who nimbly wrought a comic tragedy,
As poet woos a muse, one Shakspeare call'd;
Nor Milton, who embattled Devils sung;
Nor bold Sir Blackmore, who an Epic built,
Quick as can mason rear a chimney-stack;
Nor later these, Klopstock and Wieland fam'd,
Who sung, this King of Elves &mdash; that King of Kings,
Dar'd the prolific Oven blaze in song.

Expect not now of Furnaces to hear,
Where Aeolus dilates the liquid glass;
Nor where the THREE, testing their God could save,
Walk'd barefoot through the lambent heat, unsing'd:
Nor where the Hollanders, in nests of tow,
With mimic nature incubate their eggs;
For the Domestic Oven claims my powers.

Come then, from kilns of flame, and tropic suns
Each salamander Muse, and warm my brain.

Need I describe? &mdash; Who hath a kitchen seen,
And not an arch'd concavity call'd Oven?
Grand farinaceous nourisher of life!
See hungry gape its broad mouth for its food,
And hear the faggots crackling in its jaws,
Its palate glowing red with burning breath.
Do not approach too near; the ingulphing draught
Will drink your respiration ere you list.

Glance now the fire-jambs round, and there observe
Utensils form'd for culinary use,
Shovel and tongs, like ancient man and wife,
He, with his arms a-kim, and she, in hoops.
There, dangling sausages in chains hang down;
As Sciences and Arts, distinct, allied;
Or, as in Union bound our sister States.
Here, flayed eels, strung pendant by the waist;
So swing aloof victims in heathen climes;
O Algier hearts, to mock at writhing pain!
And, high on lug-bar, ponderous ham to smoke;
So may each Traitor to his Country hang!
And, thick on nails, the housewife's herbs to dry;
Coltsfoot for pipe, and spearmint for a tea.
Upon the hearth, the shrill-lung'd cricket chirps
Her serenade, not waiting to be prest
And Sue, poking the cinders, smiles to point
A billet, ring, or gallant, fashion'd there,
For fond associations cross the mind.
And purring puss, her pied-coat licked sleek,
Sits mousing for the crumbs, beside black Jack.
He, curious drone, with eyes and teeth of white,
And natural curl, who eighteen Falls has seen,
And cannot yet count four!  nor ever can,
Though task'd to learn until his nose be sharp.
'Tis marvel, if he thinks, but when he speaks;
Else, to himself, why mutter loud, and strange,
And scold, and laugh, as half a score were by?
In shape, and parts, a seed of Caliban!
He now is roasting earth-nuts by the coals,
And hissing clams, like martyrs mocking pain,
And sizzing apples, puctur'd with a pin,
While in the embers hops the parching maize,
Crack &mdash; crack &mdash; disrupting with the heat, like bombs
Craunching, he squats, and grins, and gulps his mug,
And shows his pompion-shell, with eyes and mouth,
And candle fitted for the tail of kite,
To scare the lasses in their evening walk&mdash;
For, one day, and Thanksgiving-Eve will come.

Now turn we to the teeming Oven; while,
A skilful midwife, comes the aged Dame,
Her apron clean, and nice white cap of lawn,
With long, lean arm, she lifts the griding slice,
And inward slides it, drawing slowly out.
In semi-globes, and frustrums of the cone,
Tann'd brown with heat, come, smoaking, broad high loaves;
And drop-cakes, rang'd like cocks round stack of hay;
Circles, and segments, pies and turn-overs,
For children's children, who stand teazing round,
Scorching their mouths, and dance like juggler's apes,
Wishing the pie more cool, or they less keen.
Next, brown and wrinkled like the good dame's brow,
Come russet-coated sweetings, pulp for milk;
A luscious dish &mdash; would one were brought me now!
And kisses, made by Sue, for suitor's pun.
And when the morrow greets each smiling face,
And from the church, where grateful hearts have pour'd
Led by the man of God, their thanks and prayers,
To Him, who fills their granaries with good,
They hurry home, snuffing the spicy steams,
The pious matron, with full heart, draws forth
The spare-rib crisp &mdash; more savoury from the spit!
Tall pots of pease and beans &mdash; vile flatulents;
And puddings, steaming to the rafter'd wall;
And sweet cup-custards, part of the dessert.
These all, amalgamated, subtilized,
And by the generative heat matur'd,
A goodly birth, brought forth in welcome time.

Illustrious Oven, warmest, heartiest friend!
Destroy but thee, and where were cookery then?
We, cannibals, might torrify and seethe,
On dry blood-reeking flesh in the cold sun;
Or, like the Arab, on his racing horse,
Beneath the saddle swelter it for food.

And, yet, ere thou give us, we must give thee.
Thus, many an Oven barren is for life.
O Poverty!  how oft thy wishful eye
Rests on thine Oven, hungry as thyself!
Would I might load each Oven of the Poor,
With food each palate craves &mdash; a fruitless wish!
Yet seldom hear we Industry complain,
And no one should complain, who hath two eyes,
Two hands, and mind and body, sound and free.
And such, their powers to worthy ends applied,
Be pleas'd, indulgent Patroness, to feed.
