ARTHUR AND THEODORE.
SCENE &mdash; FIELDS NEAR A COTTAGE. &mdash; TIME &mdash; SUMMER'S EVENING.

THEODORE.
No eve was e'er more still &mdash; no eve more clear;
Sprinkling the skies, the twinkling lights appear.
The lonely tree-toad in the copse is heard,
And hush'd in sleep the song of every bird;
Save, now and then, a hawk, in drowsy flight,
Swims through the air, a speck upon the sight.
The purblind bat wheels, flapping, over head,
And fire-flies light their lovers o'er the mead.

ARTHUR.
Now, waking on the green, at our approach,
And, drawing from the wing the pillow'd head,
See nodding ducks trudge quacking to the pool,
And stately geese like strutting soldiers stalk.
The waters sparkle to their oary feet,
And, swollen, ruffle to a mimic storm.
The heifer's low rides on the freshening breeze,
And the small tinkling of the wether's bell,
How dark the woods, and brown the hills appear.
The heart is better'd by such peaceful scenes.

THEODORE.
What envied life the peasant may enjoy;
His ships no storms, his gold no thieves annoy.
His daily toil reward and vigour gives,
Sweet is his sleep &mdash; contentedly he lives.
No false ambition elevates his mind,
To reign a monarch or be sage refin'd.
He whistles to his flocks &mdash; a pleasing care,
And builds his walls &mdash; not castles in the air.
He sows his seed, and nursery stocks with trees,
And, with good humour, coarsely aims to please.
While frisk his little ones among the lambs,
Or, pull the grass and tender to the dams,
And, pelting, fly for life the bruising rams.

ARTHUR.
No, not a 'squire more peaceful life enjoys,
Than he, whose cares are bounded by his need;
Who hangs on no dependant for his gains.
Within his cot, the busy wheel flies round,
True wheel of fortune &mdash; and their ready task,
Healthful with toil, his ruddy daughters ply;
Unlike the milk-fac'd pets which fear the sun.

THEODORE.
At eve &mdash; or on the stile, or round the door,
They'll titter, bashful, at the homeward boor;
Or, chance to aged crone, list mournful tale,
Of Hubert's crime, and little Ellen frail,
And weep, that when he sought her for his bride,
So broke her heart, scarce wedded ere she died,
And how poor Hubert's brain could not the shock abide.

ARTHUR.
What pleasing gloom these twilight moonbeams make,
Listening, in this side-hedge, to insects' hum,
Or glimmering to illume their bowery dreams.
Yon patch of grain &mdash; how, billowy, it bends,
At distance, those small shrubs obscurely seen,
Mocking reality, swell to tall trees.
I startled just now, through that broken wall,
To spy a nodding mullein &mdash; simple fool!
Each plant is drest in a strange livery.

Two harvests past &mdash; oh!  how your cheek did change!
'Twas near this spot &mdash; I came upon you sudden&mdash;
You look'd so foolish! &mdash; with a finch's nest&mdash;
Robbing the crying bird &mdash; to please that jilt&mdash;

THEODORE.
Who could withstand her sweet deceptive art,
Or, having seen, keep home his truant heart?
When last I saw the maid, she gave me this,
Her pledge of troth, and seal'd it with a kiss.
As clasps the brede my finger, might I now
Clasp her yet true &mdash; how would my bosom glow!
But blighted hope, and faithless woman's frown,
To bed of thorns converts a bed of down.

ARTHUR.
That Caroline was comely, none may doubt,
But fickle was she, as her beauty frail.

THEODORE.
Oh!  say no more! &mdash; Now home let us repair,
And sink to rest &mdash; the balm of every care.
