God of the glorious Lyre!
Whose notes of old on lofty Pindus rang,
White Jove's exulting quire
Caught the glad echoes and responsive sang&mdash;
Come!  bless the service and the shrine
We consecrate to Thee and Thine!

Fierce from the frozen north,
When Havock led his legions forth,
O'er Learning's sunny groves the dark destroyers spread:
In dust the sacred statue slept,
Fair Science round her altars wept,
And Wisdom cowled his head.

At length, Olympian Lord of morn
The raven veil of night was torn,
When through golden clouds descending,
Thou didst hold thy radiant flight,
O'er nature's lovely pageant bending,
Till Avon rolled all-sparkling to thy sight!

There, on its bank, beneath the Mulberry's shade,
Wrapped in young dreams a wild-eyed Minstrel strayed:
Lighting there and lingering long,
Thou didst teach the Bard his song;
Thy fingers strung his sleeping shell;
And round his brows a garland curled,
On his lips thy spirit fell,
And bade him wake and warm the world!

Then Shakspere rose!
Across the trembling strings
His daring hand he flings,
And lo!  a new creation glows!
There clustering round, submissive to his will,
Fate's vassal train his high commands fulfil.
Madness with his frightful scream,
Vengeance leaning on his lance,
Avarice with his blade and beam,
Hatred blasting with a glance.
Remorse that weeps, and Rage that roars,
And Jealousy that dotes but dooms, and murders, yet adores.

Mirth, his face with sunbeams lit,
Waking Laughter's merry swell,
Arm in arm with fresh-eyed Wit,
That waves his tingling lash, while Folly shakes his bell,
From the feudal towers pale Terror rushing,
Where the prophet bird's wail
Dies along the dull gale,
And the sleeping blood is gushing!

Despair that haunts the gurgling stream,
Kissed by the virgin moon's cold beam,
Where some lost maid wild chaplets wreathes,
And swan-like there her own dirge breathes,
Then broken-hearted sinks to rest,
Beneath the bubbling wave that shrouds her maniac breast.

Young Love, with eye of tender gloom,
Now drooping o'er the hallowed tomb,
Where his plighted victims lie,
Where they met, but met to die:&mdash;
And now, when crimson buds are sleeping,
Through the dewy arbour peeping,
Where Beauty's child, the frowning world forgo,
To youth's devoted tale is listening,
Rapture on her dark lash glistening,
While fairies leave their cowslip cells and guard the happy spot,
Thus rise the phantom throng,
Obedient to their master's song,
And lead in willing chain the wondering soul along.

For other worlds war's Great One sighed in vain
O'er other worlds see Shakspere rove and reign!
The rapt Magician of his own wild lay,
Earth and her tribes his mystic wand obey,
Old ocean trembles, thunder cracks the skies,
Air teems with shapes, and tell-tale spectres rise:
Time yields his trophies up, and death restores
The mouldering victims of his voiceless shores:
Night's paltering hags their fearful orgies keep,
And faithless guilt unseals the lip of sleep;
The fireside legend, and the faded page,
The crime that cursed, the deed that blessed an age,
All, all come forth &mdash; the good to charm and cheer,
To scourge bold Vice, and start the generous tear;
With pictured Folly gazing fools to shame,
And guide young Glory's foot along the path of fame.

Mark the sceptered Traitor slumbering!
There flit the slaves of conscience round;
With boding tongue foul murders numbering,
Sleep's leaden portals catch the sound.
In his dream of blood for mercy quaking,
At his own dull scream behold him waking.
Soon that dream to fate shall turn,
For him the living furies burn;
For him the vulture sits on yonder misty peak,
And chides the lagging night, and whets her hungry beak.
Hark!  the trumpet's warning breath
Echoes round the vale of death,
Where through the maddening ranks the God of slaughter rides,
And o'er their spouting trunks his reeking axle guides!
Unhorsed, unhelmed, disdaining shield,
The panting Tyrant scours the field,
Vengeance!  he meets thy dooming blade!
The scourge of earth, the scorn of heaven,
He falls, unwept and unforgiven,
And all his guilty glories fade.
Like a crushed reptile in the dust he lies,
And hate's last lightning quivers from his eyes!

Behold you crownless King&mdash;
Yon whitelocked, weeping Sire;&mdash;
Where heaven's unpillared chambers ring,
And burst their streams of flood and fire;
He gave them all &mdash; the daughters of his love;&mdash;
That recreant pair! &mdash; they drive him forth to rove.
In such a night of wo,
The cubless regent of the wood
Forgets to bathe her fangs in blood,
And caverns with her foe!
Yet one was ever kind,
Why lingers she behind?
O pity!  view him by her dead form kneeling,
Even in wild frenzy holy nature feeling.
His aching eyeballs strain
To see those curtained orbs unfold,
That beauteous bosom heave again.&mdash;
But all is dark and cold.
In agony the Father shakes;
Grief's choking note
Swells in his throat,
Each withered heart-string tugs and breaks!
Round her pale neck his dying arms he wreathes,
And on her marble lips his last, his death-kiss breathes.

Down!  trembling wing &mdash; shall insect weakness keep,
The sun defying eagle's sweep?
A mortal strike celestial strings,
And feebly echo what a seraph sings?
Who now shall grace the glowing throne,
Where, all unrivalled, all alone,
Bold Shakspere sat, and looked creation through
The Minstrel-Monarch of the worlds he drew?

That throne is cold &mdash; that lyre in death unstrung,
On whose proud note delighted wonder hung.
Yet Old Oblivion, as in wrath he sweeps,
One spot shall spare &mdash; the grave where Shakspere sleeps.
Rulers and ruled in common gloom may lie,
But nature's laureate Bards shall never die.
Art's chisselled boast, and glory's trophied shore
Must live in numbers, or can live no more.
While sculptured Jove some nameless waste may claim,
Still rolls th' Olympic Car in Pindar's fame:
Troy's doubtful walls, in ashes passed away,
Yet frown on Greece in Homer's deathless lay:
Rome, slowIy sinking in her crumbling fanes,
Stands all-immortal in her Maro's strains:&mdash;
So, too, yon giant Empress of the isles,
On whose broad sway the sun forever smiles,
To time's unsparing rage one day must bend,
And all her triumphs in her Shakspere end!

O Thou!  to whose creative power
We dedicate the festal hour,
While Grace and Goodness round the altar stand,
Learning's anointed train, and Beauty's rose-lipped band&mdash;
Realms yet unborn, in accents now unknown,
Thy song shall learn, and bless it for their own.
Deep in the West as Independence roves,
His banners planting round the land he loves,
Where nature sleeps in Eden's infant grace,
In time's full hour shall spring a glorious race.&mdash;
Thy name, thy verse, thy language shall they bear,
And deck for Thee, the vaulted temple there!
Our Roman-hearted Fathers broke
Thy parent empire's galling yoke,
But Thou, harmonious Monarch of the mind,
Around their Sons a gentler chain shall bind:&mdash;
Once more, in Thee, shall Albion's sceptre wave,
And what her mighty Lion lost, her mightier Swan shall save!
