Listen!  I heard a voice, a solemn voice,
But sweet and fervent too, like that of prayer;
Such as would make angelic breasts rejoice,
And call to hearken from their starry sphere,
From yonder cot it comes &mdash; I'll draw me near,
Its light shines like a star upon the night,
And to my wandering footsteps far more dear;
A better guide perchance, a holier light,
Leading more near to heaven than that above me sight.

Oh, 'tis a lovely scene!  The grey-hair'd sire,
With lifted hands, imploring on each child
All that the lip can breathe, the soul desire,
To guide their footsteps through the world's deep wild;
See how the glittering tears his warm cheek gild!
How rushes through the wane of years the glow;
How beams his look, with all the father fill'd!
The ardency intense lights eye, lip, brow,
Which all his blossom's tho'ts, hopes, fears, and wises show.

There kneels the mother by her partner's side,
Silent her tongue, but oh, how full her eyes!
Look at those sacred tears, whose gentle tide
The loudest utt'rance of the lip supplies.
Oh!  what can equal her beseeching sigh?
If 'tis not heard in heaven, then never came
Thither the sound of supplications high;
Vainly have nations pil'd the altar's flame,
The intensest of them all ne'er reach'd a mother's claim.

Beside her, rising manhood's form,
Her son, her secret pride and glory, bows;
Bright in his cheek with labor's color warm,
The honorable tint his forehead shows;
His eye's dark glance is veil'd, as it would close
Awhile to all on earth his heart deems fair,
His lips soft moving, till responsive vows
Are rising to his hoary father's prayer,
Pleading with the high Heavens &mdash; "Oh, guard from every snare."

And yonder there's a group in happiest being,
The fairy tenants of the cottage dome,
Kneeling before the eyes of Him, all-seing,
Who watches if their thoughts or glances roam.
The doll untouch'd is laid before the drum,
That treasur'd instrument of loudest sound
Stands close beside its master, but as dumb
As if forgotten, on the darksome ground,
While light night's dew-clos'd flowers they bend and cluster round.

Look at the little hand upon each brow,
Covering the face before the unseen God!
Listen!  ye might have heard the lisped vow
Like cherub echoes seeking his abode.
Revile it not, despise it not, ye proud!
Nor say it is the jargon learn'd by rote,
Useless and meaningless:  those words allow'd
Upon the youthful memory to float,
Shall be the waking chord to many a heavenly note!

Oh, lovely scene &mdash; most lovely:  would that thou
Didst not bedeck the cottage bower alone,
But beneath every roof in beauty glow,
From the low hamlet to the lofty throne.
Then, England, where the smiles of Heaven thine own,
The bright paternal smiles of Deity;
Then, my loved country, would thy soil be known,
The hallow'd and the blest, the truly free,
And every evening hour a nation's worship see.
