The day is dying!  as the sun goes down,
The glimmering twilight trembles on each spray,
And gilds with crimson the steep mountain's brown,
Reflected from the hues of dying day;
And the bright blaze of beauty that is spread
O'er nature's face, returning day's farewell
Is eloquent and meek, as farewell said
By dying friends, whose raptur'd bosoms swell
With faith and hopes of morn, brighter than tongue can tell!

Such is the twilight of the human heart
When faith lights up its evening clouds of dun,
Gilding the hour, the soul from earth doth part,
With light more glorious than the setting sun;
For throbs responsive in each bosom swell,
Kindling the twilight of their sunset west,
With hues retaining long the fond farewell
Which warmly gushes from th' o'erflowing breast,
When Love's last, fervent kiss, on dying lips is prest!

Now the faint sun seems flickering in the west,
Like some lone spirit hovering round the tomb,
Sighing to sleep within its peaceful breast,
And yet mistrustful of its deepening gloom:
And now it fades &mdash; and comes the enchanted hour
When wayward fancy weaves her mystic charms,
And forms from heaven, obedient to her power,
Are here again, and clasp'd in widow'd arms,
And with Elysian joy, the mourner's spirit warms.

And now 'tis gone:  from eastern hill there peeps
A milder orb, relieving the thick gloom
That broods o'er nature while the day-god sleeps,
As though its beam might fill the sun-light's room.
The star of love is beaming in the sky,
And numbers worship 'neath its placid reign,
Whose faithful hearts are bound by golden tie,
That links young hearts in more than mortal chain;&mdash;
And love, and love's sweet witcheries, now unbroken reign!

But list!  some spirit whispers &mdash; "these shall fade
Like the last rays of twilight in the west,
The glow of youth &mdash; the bloom of beauty's braid,
And ardent feelings gushing from the breast;
All, all shall fade &mdash; but the ETERNAL ONE&mdash;
Whose single word from nothing spoke the whole,&mdash;
The bashful twilight of the setting sun,
The hymning spheres that in their circles roll,
And the frail tenement where dwells the Heaven-lit soul."

But say, fair spirit, shall the restless soul
That roams e'en now beyond earth's farthest bound,
And spurns the fetters of its base control,
Go out in twilight &mdash; die in gloom profound,&mdash;
When the same hues betoken coming day
As those that blush along the western sky,&mdash;
When annual flowerets make spring's bosom gay,
And deck the turf where man's last relics lie?
"Oh, no!  man's spring-time is in worlds on high!"

'Tis good to pause a moment on the verge
Of coming even, while in majestic tone,
Unearthly voices pour a hollow dirge,
For all the joys that with the day have flown;
For 'tis the hour when the poor soul may soar
In dreamful blessedness to the worlds above,
And meet those pure ones it had known before,
To join the tendrils of their sunder'd love,
And through the bowers of fancied bliss enraptur'd rove.

'Tis good to gaze upon the clouds that swell
In crimson pillars up the twilight west,
It minds us of the distant funeral bell,
And the last smile of love on grief imprest;
For when the day thus mildly sinks in rest,
Like virtue betokening from the gate of heaven,
It prompts man onward to that region blest,
Whose vision to the eye of faith is given,
As the rapt spirit gazes on the hues of even!
