Poor child!  (how contented it sleeps)
As yet quite a stranger to woe;
'Tis unknown why thy mother thus weeps,
Why her tears thus incessantly flow:
Ah, cease not to flow briny tears!
Ye bring to my anguish relief;
Ye give vent to my heart rending cares,
And soften the sharpness of grief.

Ah!  did ye not flow to my aid,
My heart would have broken in twain;
Alas!  by barbarians betray'd,
I shall ne'er see my husband again!
The wretches well skill'd to beguile,
With a smile on their brow thou didst meet;
Ah!  why didst thou trust in that smile,
Beneath it lurk'd faithless deceit.

I am told that in dungeons confin'd,
Shut out from the light of the day,
With strong fetters the captive they bind,
Who is made (sad misfortune!) their prey:
That in huge floating castles they're born,
To a country far distant from here&mdash;
From all tender connexions they're torn,
From all that their souls could hold dear.

Far, far, they are born from the soil,
Where their love, their affections remain;
And compell'd for their tyrants to toil,
To gather their harvests with pain.
The sigh that is bursting my heart,
Accuses my fondness and care;
Ah why did I let thee depart!
In thy dangers why did not I share!

Ah my child! &mdash; but I shall not yet be
Quite of all consolation bereft&mdash;
I will cease to lament &mdash; since in thee,
I still some small comfort have left:
I will live! &mdash; but it is for thy sake!
To thee I'll transfer all my care;
But for thee &mdash; I had plung'd in the lake,
In the transports of grief and despair.

To the woods dark recesses I'll fly,
Where fell tygers prowl nightly for prey;
Could I hide from these ravagers' eye&mdash;
The tyger's less cruel than they.
'Tis hunger alone that excites
These monsters to range thro' the wood;
But the Christian, more savage, delights
To riot in carnage and blood.

Grief will soon bring my life to a close,
To the land I shall then wing my way,
Where the spirits departed repose&mdash;
Impatient I wait for the day!
I again shall my husband behold,
In safety reclin'd in the grove;
Where the fierce Christian thirsting for gold,
Shall part me no more from my love.
