Thou more than beautiful!  ah tell me why,
Young daughter of the Spring, thou lov'st to shed
Thy perfume here, and open thy blue eye,
Where silence seems the intrusive step to dread?
And nought around but relics of the dead,&mdash;
While far above extends thy own soft azure sky.

Is it that in such solitude, alone,
Thou find'st, young modest one, thy chief delight?
Heaven's breath seems scarcely sweeter than thine own;
While softly glowing in love's purple light,
Thou shouldst, methinks, the fondest gaze invite:
Why, thus enchanting, then, breath out thy life unknown?

Ah me!  how likest to myself thou art
In this thy wayward mood; it is thy choice,&mdash;
'Tis mine &mdash; to live from the rude world apart:
But thou, so beautiful!  no churlish voice
Forbids thee in such season to rejoice&mdash;
Nor withered is thy bloom, nor desolate thy heart!

But whose green bed is this on which thy cheek
Reposes now so gently and secure?
If, haply, 'tis some human blossom's, speak!
Alas!  so young, and innocent, and pure,
Why closed its vermil lips thus immature,&mdash;
Nipp'd in the rose of life, when winds were cold and bleak!

But what if some fair brow &mdash; heaven &mdash; lighted eye
Sparkling beneath redundant locks of gold&mdash;
Some matchless nymph, too beautiful to die,
Be coldly wrapp'd within the insensate mould!
Say, who shall now the story sad unfold,
Or tell who breathed for her the warm yet fruitless sigh?

Or, &mdash; wing'd with joy, and lovely as the day
When, dancing in the east, he first appears,&mdash;
Some youth, perhaps, untimely snatch'd away,
Here lies embalmed in a mother's tears;
And she &mdash; when all her hopes and withering fears
With that sweet light were quench'd &mdash; of sorrow doom'd the prey!

Oh down my heart!  a heavier, sadder tale
Some whispering spirit pours upon my ear,
As now it flutters in the mournful gale;
One who to every virtue was most dear&mdash;
The fond, lamented mother slumbers here!
Ah, when .shall virtue, love, o'er tyrant death prevail?

Never, oh never!  yet even thou, meek Flower,
Shall teach a lesson precious in my view&mdash;
Nay, teach me to defy that tyrant's power!
Thy lavish incense is to goodness due;
And though, like man's, thy days are here but few,
Thou diest but to revive with him in happier hour!
