Hail, holy maids!  who haunted once the steep,
That hangs o'er Delphi's old prophetic fane;
Hail, holy maids!  who still your influence keep,
Still claim the poet's vows, and bless his strain:
Pass'd of all others is the fabled reign,
Which faith and genius once had made divine;
The cavern breathes its omens all in vain,
No suppliants bow, no votive altars shine,
No trembling priestess chants, nor God protects the shrine.

The wandering Dryad has forgot her bower,
The Naiads all have left the lonely spring,
Fair Dian sports not at her twilight hour,
The bird of Venus plumes no more her wing,
No more Apollo strikes the heavenly string,
Mars' fiery helm, Saturnia's angry frown,
E'en Jove's dread thunders, now no terrors bring;
All, save in ancient story, are unknown&mdash;
But yet, as then, YE reign &mdash; yet worshipp'd, though alone.

Hail, holy maids!  in many a ruder clime
Than that of fairy Greece, ye linger still&mdash;
Still proudly triumph o'er the spell of time,
O'er war, o'er glory, gain'd from human ill;
And they, who once fame's loudest blast could fill,
Less than the humblest votary of your smile,
Now in some narrow grave forgotten dwell&mdash;
But HE, the gathering wrinkle can beguile
From Time's old brow, and seize immortal youth the while.

Are not these turrets symbols of your power?
For whom the pomp of that sepulchral cell?&mdash;
Warriors, and priests, and sages &mdash; that their hour,
Their passing hour, have fill'd, and fill'd it well:
Warriors, who tamed the proud, the infidel;
Priests, who have led the erring soul to God;
Sages admired &mdash; yea loved; long tablets tell
Their fame, and gaudy scutcheons their abode&mdash;
Yet who for thought of them, these halls and aisles hath trod?

No!  no!  they do not give these towers their charms,
'Tis not for them, that wandering strangers come,
That genius lingers, beauty's bosom warms&mdash;
They warm, they linger, o'er a poet's tomb.
Yes!  holy maids!  that poet's hallow'd doom&mdash;
Hallow'd, if generous virtues may atone
For human frailty &mdash; shall your lamp relume,
Your shrine restore, in scenes to fame unknown,
And many a breast, now cold, the potent spell shall own.
