Who?  hapless, helpless being, who
Shall strew a flower upon thy grave?
Or who, from "mute oblivion's power,"
Thy disregarded fame shall save?

Honor, and wealth, and learning's store,
The votive urn remembers long;
And ev'n "the annals of the poor,"
Live in their bard's immortal song.

But a blank stone best stories thee,
Whom sense, nor wealth, nor fame could find:
Poorer than aught beside we see,
A human form without a mind.

A casket gemless! &mdash; yet for thee
Pity suspends the tender wail;
For reason shall a moral see,
While mem'ry paints the simple tale.

Yes, it shall paint thy humble form,
Clad decent in its russet weed,
Happy in harmless wandering's charm,
And pleas'd thy father's flock to feed.

With vacant, reckless smile she bore,
Patient, the scorner's curel jest;
With unfix'd gaze could pass it o'er,
And turn it pointless from her breast.

Her tongue, unable to display
The unform'd choas of her mind!
No sense its rude sounds could convey,
But to parental instinct kind.

Yet, close to every human form
Clings imitation's mimick power,
And she was fond and proud to own
The school time's regulated hour:

And o'er the mutilated page
Mutter'd the mimick lesson's tone;
And ere the scholar's task was said,
Brought ever and anon her own:

And many a truant boy would seek,
And drag reluctant to his place;
And ev'n the master's solemn rule,
Would mock with grave and apt grimace.

Each heart humane could freely love
A nature so estrang'd from wrong;
And even infants would protect
Her from the passing traveller's tongue.

But her prime joy was still to be,
Where holy congregations bow;
Rapt in wild transports when they sung,
And when they pray'd, would bend her low.

O Nature!  wheresoe'er thou art,
Some latent worship still is there;
Blush ye!  whose form without a heart,
The Ideot's plea can never share!

Poor guileless thing!  just eighteen years,
Parental cares had rear'd alone;
Then (lest thou e'er should'st want those cares,)
Heaven took thee spotless to its own.

Full many a watching eye of love
Thy sickness and thy death did cheer;
And reason, while she joys, approves
The instict of a parent's tear.

Poor guileless thing!  forgot by men,
The heaving turf directs to thee;
"'Tis all thou art" to mortal ken,
But Faith beyond the tomb can see.

For what a burst of mind shall glow,
When disencumber'd from this clod;
Thou, who on earth could'st nothing know,
Shall rise to comprehend thy God!

Oh!  could thy spirit teach us now,
Full many a truth the gay might learn;
The value of a blameless life
Full many a scorner might discern.

Yes!  they might learn who waste their time,
What it must be to know no sin:
They who pollute the soul's sweet prime,
What, to be spotless pure within.

Go!  then and seek her humble grave,
All ye who sport in Folly's ray,
And as the gale the grass shall wave,
List to a voice that seems to say:

"'Tis not the measure of your powers,
To which the eternal meed is given:
'Tis wasted or improved hours,
Which forfeit or secure your heaven!"
