Spirit of other days!  oh bear me hence
Through mists of ages, to that dusky time,
When DELPHI tower'd in dread pre-eminence,
And sway'd the fate of every distant clime&mdash;
Where purpled majesty and pomp sublime,
And lofty pageants, blazon'd valour forth,
Gilding with war's red radiance every crime,
And hallowing victory with sacred mirth:
What time the Persian host o'erspread the tented earth.

Hail solitary city!  all alone
In thy prophetic pride &mdash; thy deep decline&mdash;
Where countless thousands worshipp'd &mdash; is there none
To tell the fate of thy forsaken shrine!
The proud magnificence that once was thine:
But now no more &mdash; nor is one votary left
A wreath of laurel for thy sake to twine,
Or drink delirium from the breathing cleft&mdash;
Of wealth, of sacred fame, of glory all bereft!

Mighty and wonderful wert thou indeed!&mdash;
Mortals were scorn'd; with gods didst thou retire
To hold communion, and thy strengthen'd creed
Taught thee to deeper mysteries to aspire&mdash;
Thou eaglet of a bold and lofty sire,
Whose glances, shunning earth, and soaring high,
Drank deep the beams of his eternal fire&mdash;
Apollo's full and bright divinity!&mdash;
While all the earth uprose &mdash; uprose to gaze on thee!

Of kingdoms yet to flourish couldst thou speak:
Of empires past, thy trophied columns rung,
Where falchion keen, and glittering casque, and beak,
And shields of brass, and golden helmets hung;
While thy own God his fiery splendours flung
O'er flashing belt, and baldric, studded bright,
And danced thy thousand golden helms among,
Or lent thy burnish'd shields a redder light&mdash;
Fierce blazed thy glory forth, far from thy templed height!

Lo! &mdash; distant nations round thy altars rove,
And conquering warriors doff their twisted mail,
For in thy marble courts, and sacred grove.
The dreadful "Leaders of the Fates" prevail:
Favour'd of gods and man!  who shall assail
Thy monumental glory!  what shall thrust
Oblivion's mantle o'er the blazon'd tale,
Hush thy triumphant shouts, or curb thy lust?&mdash;
'Tis Time, with noiseless speed, shall tumble thee to dust!

Now through thy sepulchres a pilgrim roams&mdash;
Thy cavern tombs are all that tell of thee,
For him no fair prophetic laurel blooms,
No speaking fountain wakes her minstrelsy;
Where erst the Pythoness was wont to be,
With hair dishevel'd, and distorted mien,
Where Priest and Archon held high revelry,
And Heliconian muses graced the scene,
The Albanian peasant roves, unconscious such have been.

No Pean songs thy echoing rocks resound,
The shout of jubilee has pass'd away;
No lofty tripods consecrate the ground,
Nor sacrificial offerings hail the day;
Thy throngs of virgin votaries &mdash; where are they?
Ages have roll'd, since thou to fate wert doom'd,
Nor is one lone memorial left to say,
How thy bright pageantry was all unplumed,
Thy purpled pride o'erthrown, thy princely state entomb'd.

Yet all among the undistinguish'd heaps
Of long forgotten fanes, and mouldering walls,
The breeze of morn with wavy pinion sweeps;
And o'er the fragments of her marble halls,
Castalia's ancient fountain lightly falls;
Flings the same orb, a rich refulgence down
O'er old Parnassus' groves, but naught recalls
The wond'rous works triumphant art had shown:
And Nature reigns abroad &mdash; unconquer'd and alone.
