Erewhile, O beauteous lake!  a minstrel stood
Upon thy sparkling brink, and touching soft
The lyre he loved so well,
Breathed forth undying strains.

And now the humblest of the tuneful throng
In fancy seeks, with artless aim, to blend
The murmur of thy waves
And warblings of his lute.

Translucent flood!  within thy ever pure
And stainless breast, the heavens with wonder view
As beautiful a heaven&mdash;
As tranquil and serene.

And round thy ample brim extend smooth glades,
And shadowy groves and flowers and pendent vines,
And, mantled o'er with woods,
Soft undulating hills.

And though o'er thy bright marge no frowning cliff's
Impend &mdash; no craggy mountains, as with wall
Insuperable, fence
Thee from the northern blast&mdash;

Yet thou, disdainful, mock'st its utmost force,
And ruffian winter's rudest breath defiest:
Furious he sweeps along,
But may not chain thy wave.

And still with each return of spring thou smilest,
And seest new beauties deck thy soft domain:
And when from summer's gaze
The earth dejected shrinks,

Thou spread'st thy dazzling bosom to the sun:
While pleased, anon, with autumn's rainbow tints
And mournful shell, thou bidd'st
Thy waves mild music make.

In that soft hour when, leading up the day,
The infant dawn appears, and silvery dew
Is on each leaf, and thou
In snowy mist art wrapt&mdash;

How have I stood, enchanted, to behold
The sun triumphant spring from out yon sea
Of verdurous boughs, and all
Thy charms again unveil!

And when upon his evening couch, the lord
Of light majestic sinks, and his last ray,
Descending, seems to melt
In thy unruffled flood&mdash;

How have I pensive fix'd my eyes on thee,
And wish'd that on my breast a heavenly gleam
Might fall, and thus within
My soul as softly sink!

Yet if there be a more propitious hour,
'Tis when the moon from out the pearly east
In chasten'd splendour beams,
And sheds o'er thee, and o'er

The tranquil earth, her mild and holy light:
A shadowy grandeur then invests the scene,
While through the willing mind
A pleasing sadness steals.

O fond remembrance!  say, what boots it now
To sing of absent charms?  The morn, the eve
Return; but thee, sweet lake,
I must not see again!

Yet brighter eyes, and innocent as bright,
Shall long upon thy various beauties gaze;
And young and dewy limbs
Delight in thee to lave.

And science, haply, on thy banks shall rear
Her proudest domes; and, emulous of fame,
Bards, yet unborn, shall chant
In lofty verse thy praise.
