Life was a difficult journey, and beset
With numerous snares, so with a joyful heart
I turned aside from its tumultuous path
To visit the familiar scenes of youth,
The theatre of my childhood's careless sport.
How pleasant for the traveller, who hath grown
A-weary of his long, dull pilgrimage,
To turn his faint and faltering step aside
To boyhood's quiet home, far from the sons of pride.

It was the twilight of a summer's day,
The season's fruitful prime, and as the Eve
Leaned with a blush upon the breast of Night
I saw around the hundred well-known friends
That pleased me long ago &mdash; here an old hut&mdash;
The ruined wall &mdash; the moss-grown, ancient well,
And there the aged tree, beneath whose bough
I often sat entranced in boyish dream
To hear from aged lips some oft-repeated theme.

Methought that time had wrought a marvellous change
Within its peaceful precincts, &mdash; the clear brook
No more possess'd that sweet and careless tone
That won my boyish ear.  Oh!  I had launched
Full many a bright and gaily-painted bark
Upon its limpid wave, &mdash; and when its prow
Cleaved its swift way amid the islets green
And snowy sands that half-choked up the tide
My cheering shout would rise and echo far and wide.

Still Stream!  I long have traversed the deep sea
A wanderer on its wild and trackless waste
When my bark shivered like the yellow leaf
In Autumn's fading wood.  And yet I turn'd
From the old ocean's stern magnificence
To muse upon that ever-lulling sound
Thy drowsy waters made in their faint lapse.
I ever deemed that never-ending flow
Resembled childhood's voice, &mdash; without a tone of wo.

The cottage door was broken!  its thatch'd roof
Lay on the quench'd and long-deserted hearth
And the dark wall was settling to the ground;
The red-stemm'd honey-suckle that once clasp'd
Closely the latticed casement, and bloom'd thick,
No more gave out the known, delicious smell.
The drowsy brook that whispered at the door
An ever-delicate and untroubled air,
Had shrunk and wander'd from its weed-choak'd channel there.

&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;

On every thing are traced Decay and Change.
Look!  how the shifting Seasons slip away.
First Spring in virgin white, then Summer gay
Apparelled like an emperor in green,
Then Autumn with his "crown of golden corn"
And the old, shivering Winter, silver-haired,
Pass like the shapes at some grand carnival,
Or like the shadowy pageant of a dream,
And thus the hasty years urge on their dizzy stream.

Full oft the thrilling merriment of the soul
Is overcast by Sorrow's stormy gloom!
Full oft is Pleasure's brimming chalice drugg'd
With misery.  And Grief's regretful tear
On Glory's golden altar shed!  the sob
Is oft the echo to the singer's mirth,
And Pain's half-smothered groan falls on the ear
Like a reproach, when hearts and hopes are high
And man's rejoicing voice exults triumphantly.

The verdant wreath that nods on Spring's flush'd brow,
And the thick garlands that old Autumn hangs
High in his dim and awful palaces,
Teach lessons to the pride and pomp of man.
Those leaves on which the yellow sunbeams pour
Their blushing hues, and which the seraph Night
Forever succors with her nourishing dews
Boast but a brief existence &mdash; they all lay
Their pomp aside, and pine and quickly pass away.

Time's flying wheels leave little trace behind!
The stars and placid moon do fade away;
Day sinks in darkness, "darkness into death
Death into silence."  The rich pearl of life
Soon moulders in that blackened urn, the tomb!
E'en while you watch the wavering flame that lights
The snowy whiteness of Consumption's cheek,
Death checks Life's scanty current in its way
And the pure spirit leaves its "tabernacle of clay."

E'en Beauty mourns in her decaying bower
That Time upon her angel brow should set
His crooked autograph, and mar the jet
Of glossy locks.  Lo!  how her chaplet green
The hoar-frost, and the canker-worm destroy!
Decay's dull film obscures those glorious eyes
Tinct with soft azure like two chrystal wells
That drink the blue complexion of the sky&mdash;
In death's wide, shadowy chamber beams no mortal eye!

Oh!  who hath loved aright thy sainted charms
Kind Mother Nature!  Air, and sky and sea
And earth with wonderful creations throng!
Look on the savage desert of the sea
When o'er its features clouds and darkness roll,
And the fierce lightning waves its lurid torch;
Or when those tumbling, playful billows leap
"Like gamesome boys over the churchyard dead"
And grace thoul't even find round Ocean's awful head.

Yon everlasting heavens, how fair!  when slow
The round, red sun dips in the surges blue,
And o'er the mountains steps the twilight pale,
The curved moon then leads her shining fleet
Into the firmaments unquiet sea,
And the fantastic clouds like boiling foam
Heave up their glimmering billow to the light,
Half burying at times each struggling star,
Even as the billows hide some fisher's bark afar.

Much do I love the fellowship of the woods;
Their chime of leaves, the prattle of the brook
That saps the mouldering roots, the fairy blast
Of the gnat's "shrilly trump," and that small hum
When the bee winds his slender bugle horn,
And those gay foresters, the birds, recite,
Inimitably their artless anthem there,
Forever weaving their gay web of song
Forever blythe and noisy all the summer long.

And then I hear when Midnight's noiseless hand
Hangs her black curtains round the dreaming world,
That sorrowful nun, the wakeful nightingale,
Rehearse her mournful chant and when the sun
Hath reddened the autumnal leaf, I hear
The thievish jay and blackbird scatter out
Their pearls of song "from morn till dewy eve,"
While sharp, the thrifty squirrel at his door
Accosts me with his chat, vain of his smuggled store.
&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;
