Deep vale of sorrow!  from life's early day
Amid thy cypress shades a sojourner,
Woes of dread name have marked my winding way,
And forc'd from feeling's fount, the burning tear;
The tear for unrequited love and truth,
For honor fall'n, the purple blush of shame,
The rending sigh o'er vanquish'd hopes of youth,
The pang of woman's pride for blasted fame,
All these are mine, and more, I may not, durst not name.

Dark dregs and bitter! &mdash; yet let no one think,
Unnerv'd her energies, and quench'd her fire,
Tamely the maddening draught shall Ella drink,
No!  rather let me rouse each latent ire;
And nobly spurning the low beaten track,
The world's cold acorn, and pity of be good,
With Portia's, Arria's courage, render back,
Of being's weight the insufferable load,
A bootless gift at best &mdash; resume thy loan, my God!

The deed is done!  the steel hath gleam'd on high,
The crimson tide of life is ebbing fast,
Soon shall this breast expel the final sigh,
And these quick flutt'ring pulses throb their last!
Soft in the earth this wilder'd head shall rest,
Nor dream of ill disturb the long repose,
The daisied turf surmount this bursting breast,
Nor Ella's heart be wrung with Ella's woe,
Prison'd from sorrow there, and safe from all her foes.

Ha!  do I rave?  the mist that veil'd my sight,
Life's laboring, panting breath hath swept away,
And conscience, habited in beamy light,
Opes her broad page, and points the informing ray,
Passion's loud gust is hush'd, nor longer drowns
Her awful voice, as erst 'twas wont to do;
Truth, told in thunder, my stunn'd ear confounds,
And o'erwhelms me with its weight of woe;
Where, my distracted soul, for refuge canst thou go?

Saviour of sinners!  to thy wounded side,
Though long contemned, fain would my spirit flee;
Sole ark of safety, where the guilty bide
From floods of vengeance &mdash; yet O shield for me!
Too late!  too late!  Oh, give me back to life!
The flintiest path that ever mortal trod,
Its keenest sorrows, and its sharpest strife,
Its veriest ignominious scorn and load,
I could endure for aye &mdash; but not thy frown, Oh God!

"Laugh'st thou at my calamity?" I rush'd
Dreadless to meet thee at thy dreadful throne;
With every vile and untam'd passion flush'd,
I dar'd the doom, and pluck'd the vengeance down.
Dark boils the gulf of Death, that now I pass,
No change to meet but deep and deeper ill;
For, on the opening gates of during brass,
I read thy unrevers'd and righteous will,
"He that comes filthy here, let him be filthy still."
