Oh!  superstition!  scourge of human kind,
That rules thy vot'ries with unbounded sway;
Thy power to chain the senses, and the mind,
None can dispute, and few can disobey.
What are the charms, that ever round thee play,
That oft we find too strong to brook controul,
That frights the brave, and saddens all the gay,
While fear doth o'er our senses swiftly roll,
Enchaining fast the tongue, and gains upon the soul.

There are a few who can thy power defy;
The number is comparatively small
To them that would into thy presence fly,
Who wish thy aid, and loudly on thee call.
If but a wither'd leaf should chance to fall,
A victory over reason, thou can'st gain,
And hold the wretch within thy powerful thrall;
And does thy thraldom pleasure give, or pain
They only find the latter 'neath thy chilling reign.

Does ignorance only at thy altar kneel?
And are the sons of folly only thine?
No!  those that deeply think, and inly feel,
Are bending lowly, at thy crowded shrine;
And he that o'er the midnight lamp doth pine,
That views, by fancy's aid, the goblin sprite
That trips it o'er the lawn, in pale moon-shine,
Or sees the merry dance, at dead of night;
Then thou dost fill the heart, and steal his senses quite.

Great cause of war, let Spain thy horrors tell,
Let France thy great and mighty pow'r proclaim
And England's voice, the chorus loud shall swell,
For each may shudder at thy dreadful name:
How many lose their lives in torturing flame,
How many pine in want, and on the tree,
Expos'd to scorn severe, and public shame,
Quit this sad life &mdash; and sink with infamy;
Ah, who can tell the evils caus'd alone by thee.

But let thy vot'ries once remove the veil
Which hides thy real features from the sight,
No more shalt thou the wilder'd heart assail;
There's nought beneath that can enforce thy might,
Or seize the heart with terror or affright;
No more would men thy hated form revere,
Or grope within the darkness of the night,
Much brighter objects come their minds to cheer,
Religion pure &mdash; can silence every childish fear.
