The moon hath risen o'er the silent height
Of the blue vaulted heavens, and each star
Is faintly glimmering in its silver light,
That dimly shows the mountains tops afar,
And lights the fleecy clouds, that form its car,
But not obscure its brightness, while around
The spell of silence hangs o'er earth and air,
And not a rude, intruding voice or sound,
Falls on the ear, or mars the solitude profound.

O nature!  thou art lovely at this hour,
Whilst thou art sleeping 'neath this placid ray,
Thy charms are in their plenitude of power;
And tho' the bounding heart may beat more gay,
To view the opening of the joyous day,
There is a softer feeling rises now,
Tho' not unmix'd with sadness &mdash; and the play
Of vivid fancy's bright creative glow,
Gives place to higher thoughts &mdash; and nobler feelings flow.

Bright orb, then art most lovely!  who could gaze
With coldness or with carelessness at thee!
Or view the earth illumin'd by thy rays,
Nor feel the spirit for a moment free
From all terrestrial feelings &mdash; can it be,
That in thy bosom parted spirits dwell?
It may be fancy's whisper, but to me
It sounds scarce strangely, tho' my heart may swell
To think thou art the home of joy unspeakable.

This is but wild imagination's flight!
Yet a soft witchery is in thy beam,
That sheds its influence o'er the gloom of night,
And wraps my soul within its magic beam,
Till heaven and earth are mingled, and I seem
With airy beings of the land of thought,
To hold high converse, till I almost deem
They are indeed with life and being fraught,
And not in fancy's wild creative visions wrought.

Now come the gathering thoughts of other days,
And all the scenes that by-past hours have known;
And fancy sheds her reminiscent rays
Around the hopes and pleasures that have flown&mdash;
And gives again to being every tone,
That once was wont to wake our bosoms' swell,
When heard from lips of friends, that round us shone
Like lovely planets &mdash; till the parting knell
Gave token we should bid the last, the sad farewell!

This is the hour for silent thought, for deep
And pure devotion &mdash; while thy placid ray
Keeps watch above the world, that rests in sleep&mdash;
When all the bustle and the glare of day,
And all unquiet thoughts have pass'd away&mdash;
Like sinking storms from Ocean's troubled breast,
When evening sunbeams o'er its waters play
And all the raging of the winds supprest,
The waves in heavings soft, sink into quiet rest!
