SCENE, TURKEY.
The gentle Sadi, loveliest of the band,
That tend their flocks on Kara's yellow strand,
By love inflam'd, and wounded passion torn,
Had long endured the fond Zulieka's scorn;
Zulieka, fairest of the rural maids,
Zulieka, glory of the palm tree shades.
Young Sadi was the pride of Kara's plain,
Flame of each maid, and envy of each swain,
Flow'r of the hall, and honor of the grove,
Form'd in soft mould for luxury &mdash; and love.
A silken turban, with the crescent, grac'd
His stately front, and auburn curls embrac'd;
A scarf enwreathed his neck in many a fold,
And shining ringlets bathed his neck in gold.
Blue was his Caftan, green the robe that press'd
His manly limbs, and too-too gen'rous breast;
Fair was his visage, princely was the grace
That noble nature stamp'd upon his face;
But tow'ring far beyond description's art
Reign'd, by rich feelings thron'd, his godlike heart.
Whene'er he spoke, each listening swain approv'd&mdash;
Whene'er he sued, each willing damsel lov'd&mdash;
All but Zulieka, reckless of her troth,
As false as fair, and lovelier than both.

The nymph's disdain the hapless shepherd flew,
Till proud Bussora sparkled in his view;
There on the margin of the silver sea,
Beneath the purple fig and orange tree,
The swain reclin'd to wail his luckless fate
To pause in envy o'er his rivals' state,
To mourn Zulieka's passion fled too soon,
And sigh his sorrows to the wat'ry moon.

Tell me, thou pale Sultana of the night,
Since last, thou strewdst thy damp malignant light
On Orsa's bow'r, around whose lattice twine
The mellow clusters of the spreading vine,
Where peach and lemon in embraces bound
Chequer the purpling shadows on the ground,
Where fair Zulieka slumbers on her charms,
Sweetly reclining in my rival's arms;
Tell me since last thy silver view has eyed
This bustling ball &mdash; O say hast thou espied
A heart more hapless, or a heart more true
To honor, and &mdash; Zulieka, O to you?&mdash;
Say hast thou seen, or shalt thou ever see
A maid more false to love than she to me.
Ah, luckless Sadi, why did I believe?
Ah, false Zulieka, why did you deceive?
Oft on the pallet of the palm tree grove
We pledged the fervent kiss of mutual love;
Oft in the valley, where the woodbines curl'd,
You vow'd you loved me better than the world;
And when I cropt sweet blossoms from the hill,
The golden hyacynth, and daffodill,
The Georgian rose, fair pink, and fragrant box,
To interweave them with your precious locks,
You prais'd their sweets, and swore by Zanga's fall,
Your Sadi's love was sweeter than them all&mdash;
And while upon your burning lips I hung,
"I love you," flutter'd warmly from my tongue.

Oft to my cottage would your steps repair,
If from the valleys stray'd your fleecy care,
When I, o'erjoyed to seek the wandering flock,
Would mount the crag, and scale the rugged rock,
Confront the savage wolf with single clench,
And from his teeth your bleeding lambkin wrench;
Then lead my prize in triumph o'er the plain,
And pen the ramblers in the folds again&mdash;
You thank'd my care, you wreathed me to your breast&mdash;
Oh, Woman!  Woman!  falsehood knows the rest.
No milky flow'r in Orsa's garden blows,
With half the beauty of your bosom's snows;
No crested snakes in Orsa's garden dart,
With half the venom of your faithless heart.
Now let our blooms no more in breezy spice,
Embalm the valleys blanch'd with waving rice,
No more let Orsa's plain soft herbage yield,
Nor snowy lilies decorate the field;
No more let ringdoves warble in the woods,
Nor golden reeds adorn the silver floods
Mute be the dove, and levelled be the reed,
Parch'd be the lily on the tufted mead&mdash;
And where the rose-bush once incens'd the skies,
Let briery weeds, and thorny thistles rise.
Mount, billows, mount, and scourge the noisome shore;
Flash, lightnings, flash, and pealing thunders roar;
Rise, hurricanes, congenial to my soul;
Howl, tempests, howl, and show'ring waters roll&mdash;
Let blist'ring dews on Orsa's valley fall;
Let venom'd bees knead up for honey, gall;
Let fruit and flow'r from all her fields depart,
Since proud Zulieka scorns poor Sadi's heart.

Thus to the moon the maniac pour'd his woes,
Till o'er his flinty couch a sound arose&mdash;
The phrenzied Turk up sprung with frantic leap,
To hurl the listener from the craggy steep.
Who met his view?  Zulieka in her charms,
And swoon'd transported into Sadi's arms!

Consum'd by love, the cherish'd nymph had trac'd
Her wand'ring Sadi o'er the wat'ry waste
She fear'd some maid his feelings might estrange,
Doubted his passion, trembled at its change;
Till having heard his plaints the rock behind,
She gave her vain suspicions to the wind.
The heart transported in its Idol's kiss,
From torture's hell to all the heavens of bliss;
The long sweet kisses of adoring loves,
Wing'd the glad moments thro' the merry groves&mdash;
And when the moon next rear'd her silver head,
She strew'd her beams on Sadi's bridal bed.
