Can he not feel (tho' darker is his hue
Than that of white man,) as the white man feels?
Can he not love, and love with fervor too,
And taste a joy when infant prank reveals
A growing mind? &mdash; and when his prattler kneels,
With half form'd syllables, the One on high
Praises; a thrill of rapture steals,
And sparkles brightly in the parent's eye,
Who reads in young devotion future purity.

Then if he feels as you feel &mdash; has a heart
As prone as yours to ev'ry tie that binds
Man to his fellow &mdash; why inflict the smart
Of direst scourgings &mdash; servitude which grinds
The very soul of him who early finds
He has a frame as tender as your own?
Ah!  often, often, his sad fate reminds
The ill used negro of his wife &mdash; alone&mdash;
Who has of soothers for her loss, alas! &mdash; not one.

If he offend ye, sin against the law,
Is he not punish'd with unfeeling ire?
And from his back the ruby drops ye draw,
And future watchfulness from him require.
And why not then, admit him to the high'r
Concerns of life, where he deserves to be?
Oh!  I could ever tune compassion's lyre,
And paint his woes and unmeet misery,
If I could get one slave from noble freemen, free.

Shame on ye, boasted freemen &mdash; who pretend
The laws of God and Nature to obey;
Who swear to Virtue you will ever lend
Your whole protection &mdash; bow beneath the sway
Of truth and principle &mdash; the only ray
To light men &mdash; freemen on &mdash; no, ye are bound
By your own love of gold &mdash; ye still betray
The hapless negro &mdash; still is heard the sound
Of the poor Afric's woes, far echoing around.

If ye would wish to brighten up your fame,
Which now is sinking 'neath derision's blast,
And then appear with an unsullied name,
That none could scandal, satire on it cast,
But all exclaim at, honour the contrast;
Proclaim him free! &mdash; yea, let the Negro rove
Untrammel'd and unchained &mdash; your nation vast,
Will to the world, then honourably prove,
That freedom ye uphold, her ev'ry accent, love.
