At length is come the long expected day,
For which I often heav'd the wishful sigh;
Creation smiles beneath the genial ray,
Hark!  Hark!  the moment of departure's nigh!

Shall not the Muse awake the golden lyre.
With trembling fingers all her graces blend;
In grateful accents to the hoary sire,
Her earliest patron, her approved friend!

Shall not the Muse this well-meant homage pay,
Present this tribute at his hallow'd shrine;
For him exulting tune the Dorian lay;
For him exulting pen th' harmonious line

Thine was the task to rear my tender mind,
To bid the heart with gen'rous purpose glow;
Thyself deep-learned, virtuous, and kind,
And ever melting at another's woe!

Oft hast thou mark'd the fam'd Athenian sage,
The faithful guardian of the Grecian youth,
Who fell a victim to the people's rage,
A willing victim at the fane of truth!

Despairing TULLY, oft hast thou pourtray'd,
In vain awaiting the return of peace;
Rome's better founder, sacred Numa laid
With fair Egeria in the lap of ease.

Nor least of all Leonidas admir'd,
So nobly yielding to his country's laws;
And Agis oft, with equal zeal inspir'd,
To perish bravely in his Sparta's cause.

But how profoundly skilled in sacred lore,
Where gospel truth in garb attractive drest;
Her, vot'ry leads thro' paths unknown before,
To endless glory, and eternal rest.

Ungrateful man!  ethereal mildness view,
A Saviour yielding to the sting of death;
Each pang endure, the cross itself for you;
His foes forgiving with his latest breath.

View him awhile desert the realms of day,
Quit the blest regions of celestial light,
On you to shed his ever cheering ray,
From you to drive the gloomy clouds of night!

Persuasive while your manners did engage,
Such were the precepts that you would instill;
'Twas thus you rear'd the buds of tender age,
Matur'd and foster'd with parental skill!

Such care as this the Muse can ne'er repay,
Such care as this shall swell her humble song;
Thy genuine worth shall rouse her grateful lay,
Where Humber rolls his rapid stream along!

There oft, retir'd beneath the yew-tree's shade,
Or spreading elm her thoughts return on you;
Or on the bed of pallid sickness laid,
Recite thy praises &mdash; for awhile adieu.
