Mysterious Power!  of thee I fain would sing;
To tell of thee, my daring thoughts aspire:
But, ere my fingers touch the trembling string,
Oh breathe around me pure poetic fire;
For none so well can strike the tuneful lyre
As he who does thy potent influence own&mdash;
When thou his ev'ry effort dost inspire,
He'll sing, preluding to a strain unknown,
Unfelt, by all but thee &mdash; thy worshippers alone.

He whose dark path few lovely visions cheer,
The warrior, first in tumult and in fame,
Who ne'er has felt the chilling hand of fear,
Nor yet the rising flush of conscious shame;
If in his heart thou deign'st to light a flame,
Through each recess inspiring warmth shall steal,
That glory, int'rest, and all passions tame;
And he who unto Mars has shown such zeal,
Shall own thy magic power, and at tiny altar kneel.

The pious monk and nun, whose life is given
To mild religion, and the cause of peace,
Shut out the world, and dream alone of heaven,
All heav'nly joys that never can decrease;
If thou dost touch them, lo!  such visions cease&mdash;
They'll wish from bond or fetter to be free,
And strive in vain to gain the wish'd release&mdash;
Their thoughts and pious actions disagree&mdash;
They'll raise the voice to God &mdash; their thoughts are turn'd to thee!

The miser, who at every sound expires,
Or feels pale want mid heaps of golden store,
Dreading to grant what nature's self requires;
With heart as hard as is the sullen ore
Like radiant heat thou canst upon it pour,
And bid the gold from baser substance flow.
Avarice, the ruling passion, sways no more,
The heart with love and gratitude will glow,
Emotions which before it ne'er could feel nor know.

Thine is the power that melts the hardest heart,
That bids the savage quit his destin'd prey;
Lo!  from his hand down drops the harmless dart,
He feels &mdash; and basks beneath thy sunny ray.
Behold the lawns unharm'd around him play,
Oblivion o'er his former deeds is cast,
He listless in his native woods does stray,
Thinking that magic o'er his frame has past,
He musing sighs, and looks as though it were his last.

As some lone traveller, at dead of night,
Wand'ring bewilder'd, through the pathless glen,
Hails Luna rising with refulgence bright,
To light him to his former track again,
So thou appearest to our mortal ken,
Casting a light resplendent o'er this scene;
Cheering the loneliest, darkest hour of men;
Strewing their paths with flowers and freshest green,
While not a darkling cloud does dare to intervene.

Where are thy best lov'd haunts?  on earth where found?&mdash;
With them that in the scenes of folly dwell,
Where hoisting peals of mirth arid frolic sound,
Now dying on the gale, now rising swell?
Or with the anchorite in gloomy cell?
Or mingling with the proud in grandeur's halls?
Where, if pale mis'ry does her sorrows tell,
The heartfelt tale each trembling nerve appals,
And pity pleads in vain, they list not to her calls.

Desire's beam o'er scenes like these do glance,
That shine with dazzling brightness but to blind;
Where folly, pride, and churlishness advance,
Love lags, with lazy steps, far, far behind:
But where to touch the heart thou art inclin'd,
What new emotion gushing from it springs!
Go search the peasant's humble cot, you'll find
Affection round each word or action clings,
Far purer than in stately palaces with kings.
