The son sat by his dying mother's bed,
O'erwhelm'd with grief &mdash; distracted and forlorn
She liv'd &mdash; life's last faint spark had not yet fled,
Though pangs of deepest agony had torn
The tender fibres of her heart, and Death,
Relentless, early mark'd her for his prey&mdash;
Still wrapt in anguish with her parting breath,
She blessed her God, while hiding fast away,
She struggled with disease full many a ling'ring day.

Long, long, her only son, in sad despair,
Stood by the couch whereon his mother slept;
And oft he heav'd a groan &mdash; and oft the tear
Fell from his eye, as silently he wept.
He saw that being who had given him birth,
Writhing in torture and in misery;
Doom'd to contend a little while on earth,
With soul-subduing pain &mdash; her last hour nigh,
To wing her flight beyond the precincts of mortality.

On memory's page those days were deep imprest,
When some new joy each moment could beguile&mdash;
When in her arms he calmly sunk to rest,
Gladden'd and cheer'd by her maternal smile&mdash;
But, oh, the change!  those blissful hours were o'er&mdash;
On earth his happiness, alas!  was brief&mdash;
Ne'er knew he true delight or comfort more&mdash;
But for his dying mother sought relief,
And day and night bedew'd her couch with tears of filial grief.

Her drooping head the mother gently raised,
As from a short disturbed repose she woke,
And on her son, in fixed attention, gazed&mdash;
When, with a long-drawn sigh, thus faintly spoke:
Farewell, my only child!  we now must part!
Cease to lament &mdash; not long I'll be with thee&mdash;
Soon, soon, this languid, palpitating heart
Shall throb its last &mdash; prepare to follow me
To meet again in the blest regions of eternity.

She died in peace &mdash; my mother!  art thou gone!
Exclaim'd the son &mdash; hast thou forever fled!
And left me in this dreary world alone?
Art thou unconscious of the tears I shed?
Too true, alas! &mdash; yes, thou art gone from me&mdash;
Thy spirit sought a happier abode;
Yet mother!  I will hope to follow thee;
I'll tread the paths of virtue thou hast trod,
And seek for bliss alone in thy protecting arms, my God.
