Time, what art thou?  A giant swift and strong,
Whose pastime is amidst the rolling spheres;
Their dance thou leadest heaven's bright plain along,
Thy tracks behind thee, are a chain of years.
On &mdash; onward is thy course &mdash; thine eye appears
To pierce the future and the past to spurn;
Tho' heaven and hell should all assault thine ears,
For Time renewed, thou wilt not know return,
But steadfast hold thy way, till suns shall cease to burn.

Thy step is hastening to eternity;
E'en now thy dusky wing invests that shore,
Where erst the angel stood upon its sea,
And pledg'd the oath of Heaven, that Time shall be no more!
I hear thee call, as, thou art passing o'er,
To mark thy flight, and where thou soarest fly:
The past, thou wilt not to my hand restore,
How shall I then my pinions spread and vie
With him whose ample wing extends beyond the sky?

Thy voice I hear, it bids me to prepare
To give account of days, and months, and years,
Before Heaven's court!  How shall I meet thee there,
Since I with thee so much am in arrears?
Thou wilt not stop to ask if dark my fears,
Or bright my hopes, when my last sand is run;
For, oh!  with thee, intreaties, prayers and tears
Are nought:  joy and despair to thee are one,
The feeble glow-worm's beam is as yon giant sun.

The rolls of fate unfold themselves to thee;
Their awful page thou scann'st with stoic frown;
Steadfast thy hand pursues their firm decree;
Thy glass first measures, then thy scythe cuts down.
The angels follow where thy spoils are strown;
They gather up thy harvest round thy feet;
The tares for burning, are together thrown;
But endless glory waits the golden wheat,
Where never-fading spring has fix'd her blooming seat.

But Time, himself, shall soon be time no more;
His locks are fallen already, and his hand
Shall drop his sickle, and its toils give o'er;
His broken glass shall scatter round its sand.
New heavens and earth shall rise at God's command,
Nor Time shall lead their mazy dance along;
Eternity shall stamp this glorious band
With his own signet. &mdash; Heaven's exulting throng
Shall raise to God the voice of everlasting song.

Shall Father Time be in oblivion lost?
No!  from eternity at first he sprung;
O'er these our worlds, he held his destined post,
And round their orbs th' appointed changes rung.
Tho' death shall hold awhile his iron tongue,
Yet, like his children, he, renewed, shall rise;
For scythe and glass, his harp, like their's, be strong;
Eternal youth shall sparkle in his eye
Nor shall he e'er again forsake his native skies.
