Spirit!  who dwellest amid the upper air;
And through the liquid ether wend'st thy flight:
Rob'd in the brightness of the empyreal sphere,
Or in the starry mantle clad of night,
Breathest sweet songs of ravishing delight:&mdash;
Spirit of peace!  on thee I may not cry!
For register'd upon thy book of light,
No tear wet vision marks the struggling sigh:
Thine are the happy they whose tears are but of joy!

But thou, dark form, that shrouded in decay,
Weep'st o'er the ruins of departed bliss;
Whilst from thy throne a dimly &mdash; glimmering ray
Reveals the sadness of thy dwelling place;
Thee!  thee!  O Melancholy!  would I address;
With all thy rich voluptuousness of grief:&mdash;
For I have loved thee! &mdash; and even this
Bears witness of my fealty: &mdash; the leaf
That lisps the voice of Spring, doth to the Summer cleave.

Thee I have welcom'd at the evening close,
When day's expiring gloriousness hath flung
Its gorgeous mantle o'er the earth's repose:&mdash;
When the bright stars their anthem deep have sung;
And wakeful buds, and praising flow'rs, have hung
Their musing heads in silent, still, devotion:&mdash;
Then have I worshipped 'mid the tuneful throng!
And join'd in the glad harmony's commotion,
Till every thought was thine, and thine was each emotion!

Thee have I lov'd, when the bright morn awaking
Fresh from his dewy slumber in the skies,
Looks from his golden pillow forth, &mdash; and shaking
Far from his locks the orient day-beams rise&mdash;
And Earth, Air, Ocean, thrill with melodies:&mdash;
Ev'n then when all seem'd joyousness beside&mdash;
And every living thing essay'd to smile;
Ev'n then I've felt thine influence, and sigh'd
To think how many view'd this glorious scene, had &mdash; died!

Where the rich purple dyes the festive board,
And wealth and pride in all their pomp appear;
Where the loud laugh of revelry is pour'd,
And mirth and gladness meet alone the ear:
Where sorrow wings her far off flight &mdash; e'en there,&mdash;
Couch'd in the garb of some suppressed sigh,
Or, on the quivering lip, so pale, and sear
Ev'n there I've mark'd thee &mdash; thine exulting eye&mdash;
Alas!  there is no good but thou art hovering nigh!

Yes!  thou art there, wherever guilt is found:&mdash;
'Mid earth's gay revels &mdash; at the silent tomb:&mdash;
Wherever hope awakes her magic sound,
Or death displays his hiatus of gloom!
And yet I love thee, pale one, thus to come!
'Tis like the whisperings of some pleasant dream&mdash;
Of things that are not now &mdash; and of a home
Far off in the blue sky, whose cherub gleam
Lights up the yearning soul; &mdash; so sweet thy visits seem.

But there's a land which thou shaft never see!
And there are hearts whom thou shalt never own!
No cloud-rob'd sky shall dim that pearly sea&mdash;
But grief and sorrow still remain unknown!
And must I leave thee too?  And are there none
Shall list the accents of thy sad behest?
Alas!  too many!  I perhaps am one
Shall never reach that shore where all are blest,
Who, "having murmur'd here" are doom'd &mdash; O spare the rest!
