Nymph of the weeping eye &mdash; the flowing tear&mdash;
Companion of the sad and stricken heart,&mdash;
Thou, who to mortals art forever near,
Still lingering round some lov'd and chosen part:
Friend of the friendless!  whom none own beside&mdash;
Soul-humbling One!  to thee I willing bow!
For O, thy silent vanquishings of pride
Have taught my spirit's high control to know,
And every soaring thought to feel thy pow'r below!

There was a time &mdash; ere Hope had truant prov'd,
Or Pleasure &mdash; giddy phantom &mdash; hid her face;
When every little thing my heart had mov'd,
And all I gazed on spoke of loveliness&mdash;
There was a time, vain one, I knew thee not!
For every thought, and every feeling, lent
The charm of Beauty to the humblest lot!
And I was happy! &mdash; Heav'n had not yet sent,
Nor thee, a pang, to mar my bosom's glad content!

Yes, I was happy! &mdash; Memory dared not chide;
For Hope, and Joy, and Truth, were written on
The beauteous precincts of a brow, unhid
By care &mdash; undimm'd by sadness!  I was one
To whom Life seemed a gay and happy dream
Of cloudless sunshine:  And the fairy forms
Imagination gifted with her gleam,
Were like the burning thoughts &mdash; the madd'ning charms&mdash;
The deep &mdash; wild &mdash; blaze, that Love so tinctures with alarms!

O, I was then all feeling &mdash; all desire!
Tho' Disappointment scowled across my path,
Hope shew'd her talisman &mdash; the quenchless fire,
The boundless thirst for knowledge &mdash; all that hath
Dominion in the will, unshackled soul,
Burst forth in newer energies! &mdash; the touch
Of vandal death, could hardly dare control
The fiery mountings of my spirit &mdash; such
Was the fierce flame within me &mdash; raging, O, how much!

Alas!  proud one, that thou shouldst love to scathe
The faithful and the feeling heart alone!
That thou shouldst visit with wrath supreme,
That bosom whose deep throbs are all thine own!
The tenderest plant is soonest doomed to fade!
The changing heart, and the inconstant eye,
Wither not soon as those by nature made
Changeless and deep! &mdash; Whose pure intensity
Trembles with every cloud that flitteth lowering by!

Heard ye the voice of music in the hall?
The lute's soft breathings &mdash; and the pomp &mdash; the state,
Of the loud-swelling organ &mdash; heard ye all
There feasteth those whom men have styled great!
Hark! &mdash; 'tis the voice of laughter; and the sound
Of jocund footsteps in the merry dance:
Think ye that they shall ever thus be found?
Brief is the hour of gladness!  and the glance
Of pleasure, doth, O Grief!  but hasten thine advance!

Mark'd ye the lowly mansion?  Is there nought
To mar its harmony and peace?  Hath Wo
Forbore to visit them?  Hath careful thought
Not grav'd its image on the humble brow?
Wealth cannot bribe thee!  Hunger cannot starve
Thee from the door of Penury! &mdash; The high,
The mighty, and the humble, all must serve
Th' appointed end, and then they all must die!
What boots it if on down &mdash; or in some hovel nigh?

Vain thought!  to think that man can hide from thee!
Thou who art ever present, tho' unseen;
The brightest link in life's short chain may be
The weakest too! &mdash; Alas, who hath not seen&mdash;
Whose eye hath not yet told him that the wave
Of fortune, tho' it break upon his head,
Receding, for its fellow digs a grave
Deep, wide, and ample! &mdash; Aye, Fate's brittle thread
Full well may glisten while 'tis thus so consumed!

DEDICATION.
Poets have said &mdash; (what will not Poets say?)
That the bright stars which spangle yonder heav'n,
So bright! &mdash; so beautifully bright! &mdash; that they
Have listen'd to the voice of music riven
From earthly choirs: &mdash; shall I, tho' God has given
Not unto me the master's spell-wrought line,
But the rude pen of nature &mdash; shall even
I dare to hope, sweet Miss, thou'lt own as thine
This offspring of a heart so weak &mdash; so frail, as mine?
