It lay before me 'reft of all its pride,
Whilst the declining sun, meek, faintly shone,
As though it wish'd the mark of time to hide,
And leave it unexplored, unseen, unknown.
The twilight cooling quickly, too, was prone,
As 'twould appear, to throw its mantle o'er
The fallen greatness &mdash; dark, demolished throne,
Where blind devotedness had knelt before,
And sunk, o'ercome with woes, upon the massive floor.

It lay before me, yet I enter'd not!
It was a lonely and deserted place;
I feel no dread in a retired spot,
But love thro' ruins frequently to pace.
There is a sadden'd pleasure, oft to trace
The cover'd hearth-stone, where the cheerful fire
Burned the contiguous urchins in the face,
Whilst listening to the stories of their sire,
Who long'd their youthful breasts with ardor to inspire.

And then to find some relic of the past,
Denoting life had been within its wall;
To guess its meaning, tho' mayhap
'Twas cast regardlessly away &mdash; to loudly call
When distant echoes for a moment fall,
And on the features throw a sadden'd hue,
When the brightest sunshine, soon dispelling all
The thrills of dread, incite us to pursue,
In antiquarian search, the mysteries it knew.

I love such scenes:  altho' they tell decay,
They leave no darken'd image on the mind;
Stone has by stone fall'n crumblingly away,
And ruin well her power has defin'd;
Yet 'tis but locally; no food we find
For our sad thoughts to sate themselves withal;
No dread memorial of the heart refin'd
By penance, penitence, the biting gall
Which, sinners as we are, we taste of, one and all.

A dreary loneliness, without a ray
Which memory might, from out her store serene,
Lend to beguile the parting hours of day;
It gave, in all their fearful, dark array,
A thousand images back on the mind,
Of piteous tales of the young heart's decay;
Of wild enthusiasm, where the blind
Wrapt their fond wishes up, and every joy resign'd.

Low in that cell, now dimly to be seen,
There knelt some frail one, ruin'd and bereav'd;
The very shadow of what she had been,
When crowds profess'd, and her warm heart believ'd;
And here!  then rendezvous for souls that griev'd
For their own frailties or another's woe;
Here, where the innocent young breast hath heav'd,
When vainly striving, statue-like, to grow,
Unpitied hast thou wept, no solace didst thou know.

And thou meek lily, virtuous and pure,
The world unknowing, by the world unknown,
Why did they dare thy beauty to immure,
And turn thy smile into a bitter groan?
Is there no virtue save when they're alone?
Must the bright heavens pass unheeded by?
Or have the heartless, careless of their own,
Doom'd thee, thou sweet one, here to live and die?
Whilst they of joys forbad, partake voluptuously.

Cold was thy cell, and cold were those around;
Was here incitement to remould the heart?
No?  bitter tears fall fastly on the ground;
And sorrowfully thinking on the smart,
When from thy friends thou wert compell'd to part,
And hide thee in this prison-house of gloom,
Thick fancies into life would quickly start,
And deeper paint the horrors of thy room,
Where not a ray of joy its darkness can illume.

Farewell, thou ruin!  let the coming night
Closely entomb thee in her slightest shroud;
Dark is thy history, and sad the blight
Thy walls have cast upon the meek and proud;
Still may'st thou moulder where the gaping crowd
Come not thy cells and windings to explore;
But where the head in misery was bow'd
Let thy mementos tell of it no more,
But piece-meal fall to earth, for thou canst not restore.
