Great source of Light!  whose thousand burning beams
Lend beauty to the land, the sea, and sky,
And give the piled-up clouds their golden gleams,
Which change, like panoramas, to the eye;
Whence is the burning, Sun!  whole centuries fly,
And yet, undimmed, thou burnest still the same!
And stars and comets, like mere mortals, die;
But thou art there, unvarying in thy flame,
Where God first placed thee, Sun!  when he the world did frame.

Thou givest a splendid beauty to the throng
Of countless worlds around, which, rolling, break
The solitude of space; and with their song,
Continual as thy light, for ever make
Such music as no thunder e'er can shake.
Those planets roll to sweeter tones than e'er
Were breathed by earthly troop.  Man's feelings wake
When Woman lulls his ear with song or prayer;
But what is woman's voice to you, ye orbs?  declare!

Oh!  sing! &mdash; the shells that sparkle round the sea,
And breathe their music, when the winds pass o'er,
Your song shall echo, orbs!  to waters free;
No Peri's voice shall sigh for Eden more;
As breathe those shells, from coral isles to shore,
Fling forth your song!  till chiming with the waves,
It blends its numbers with their bursting roar,
Till earth and sea disclose their buried graves,
And man to God looks up, who with his music saves.

Put forth thy rays!  thou burning, blazing Sun!
Thou giv'st the clouds a sparkling, earnest glow,
Which bask within thy light; their robes of dun,
Soon change to crimson, or to drifts of snow,
Or wear the thousand hues of summer bow,
Sometimes they seem like armies' banners rolled,
And furled by angel-hands, they brighten so;
Again, unwrapt, about our mounts they fold,
And lie like gossamer, on blocks of virgin gold.

Who hath not seen the magic hues of sky
Which then dost spread?  Earth seems a fairy land,
Thick-set with stones, in every wave that lie,
That Heaven had caught the gorgeous hues so grand,
And strown them, sparkling, round with lavish hand.
The sapphire's blue, and blue-veined lazulite
With yellow flash, like drops of golden sand,
Were lavished there, and green and yellow chrysolite,
And purple amethyst, and tourmaline's red light.

Centre of worlds!  thou dart'st thy living fire
Along the paths of blue, thick-set with spheres;
It quivers through the Universe entire,
Like lightning through an evening cloud, that steers
From edge to edge, till all in flame appears.
'Tis then that giv'st the bow calm beauty's form,
Where leaped the thunders in their wild careers,
And hurled defiance to the armed storm:
Rise up in conflict there!  a God is where ye swarm!

Put forth thy rays upon the clouds and rain!
Paint out rich beams, bright banners on the sky;
Throw beauty on the waves, as if the Main
Had caught a fallen bow, and let it lie
Upon its breast, with many a dolphin dye;
Strew gems and gemlets on the up-turned leaves,
Dropped from above, where treasures never die;
Spread blushes on the flowers, till interweaves
Carnation with the white; and touch with gold the sheaves!

Hang out your golden liveries, ye Clouds!
The Sun, that spread you there, is setting fast;
Fling all your splendour forth! &mdash; like giant shrouds
Ye lower above, death-black, and overcast;
Oh!  catch his dying beam; &mdash; 'tis gone, &mdash; the last!
Ye darken more!  your robes are black to sight;
And rain-drops slowly leave your bosoms vast,
Where ye enshrine them deep, like crystals bright;
Earth, as ye lower, seems like a silver-sprinkled night.
