O LIBERTY!  fair offspring of the sky!
Whose power can shake the oppressor's throne,
Guardian of Man!  deign from thy seat on high,
To hear his sighs for thee, and still his groan;
O come!  degraded Man, enslav'd, awaits the hour,
When all the earth alike shall own thy sov'reign pow'r.

Shall Man, who wooes thee, Freedom, from his birth,
And claims the sway o'er Nature's works below,
E'er bend beneath a higher pow'r on earth,
Which dares his Right and Empire to o'erthrow!
Then come, thine innumer'd sons, enslav'd, await the day,
When all Mankind alike shall own thy sov'reign sway.

Shall he whose deeds to Reason's Guide pretend,
Whose bosom all the milder feelings grace,
Usurp a pow'r t' invert Creation's end,
To be the foe and tyrant of his race!
Ah, no!  the wretch who dares fair Freedom's bounties claim
Nor owns his fellow's right, BLASPHEMES HER SACRED NAME!

Hail!  sacred Freedom!  nor let Pride obscure,
Nor sordid int'rest blind his heav'nly light;
Let Nature's child no more thy loss endure,
No more bemoan in vain HIS BEING'S RIGHT.
Thy gentle Empire spread, from clime of burning day,
To regions of the Pole, where beams the sun's chill ray.

Man, the dire foe of Man, shall be no more,
The smiling goddess Peace, shall head the plain,
War's savage fiends shall cease their horrid roar,
And flow unstain'd with blood the lucid main.
Then come!  fair form divine!  and from thy realms on high
Let peace and blissful joy attend thee down the sky.

Alas!  how long shall Afric's sons deplore,
The rueful deeds of luxury and pain!
How long borne captive from their native shore,
And doom'd to wear the base degrading chain!
Then come!  celestial form!  diffuse thy light divine,
And Man, a kindred race, shall bow before thy shrine.

Depart, curs'd demon, Bondage, from the earth&mdash;
Columbia!  shall th' monster dwell with thee?
Let him to hell return that gave him birth&mdash;
Of satan's fellest fiends the progeny,
O'er the whole world below, fair Freedom, spread thy ray,
Millions who wait and moan shall hail the happy day.
