Creation's hush'd &mdash; the weary world
Sinks in the arms of dead repose,
And midnight's sombre shroud unfurl'd,
Mantles the face of human woes;
Sleep, placid sleep, the son of night
In silence wheels his drowsy flight,
And all is quiet &mdash; not a breath has power
To break the Sabbath stillness of the midnight hour.

The moon is up &mdash; her silver care
Dives through the pacing clouds, which seem
To thwart her way &mdash; each countless star
Pours from on high its twinkling beam,
Sweet contemplation!  what a night is this
For thy calm philosophic bliss
In such a sacred spot, for here
The mould'ring wrecks of heroes lie on earth's cold bier.

Look on yon steepy mound whose side
Shews the fresh trace of busy toil,
And mark how bleaching bones divide
In ghastly nakedness the soil.
Relics of giant strength are there
In crumbling ruin &mdash; skulls do stare
From out their earthly beds, and preach
In language stronger far than eloquence may reach.

Ye silent monitors that still
Hold on your mute harangues, unfold
What mighty souls were wont to fill
These frames of more than mortal mould.
Ask not the dead &mdash; yon rough-hewn stone
Which the pale moon doth smile upon,
Can tell that here in slumber lie
The valiant sons of Malta's matchless chivalry.

Oh!  how the witchery of thought
Can animate these crumbling slain,
Place them in battles fiercely fought,
And bid them fight and die again!
Perchance yon skull by mattock riven,
And mouldering in the winds of heaven,
'Neath Solma's proud walls hath planned
The bold assault, or nightly havoc of the Paynim band.

That shattered fragment huge and grim;
Like tower of strength in dark decay,
Hath shone the warrior's plated limb
In hot contention's bloody day;
Hundreds have watched its signal dire,
And thousands fallen beneath its ire,
When roused as from a midnight trance,
'Gainst pagan tyrants Europe couched her nightly lance.

Yet here in "cold obstruction" lie
Heroes that turned the battle-tide;
Nor yew, nor cypress o'er them sigh,
Nor stone informs us when they died.
By time or Gothic bigot reft,
Nought of their honours now is left:
Sleep on, blest shades!  and may your lot
Teach us that all but virtue in the grave must rot.
