Ye Winds, that sweep the universal Earth,
And take upon yourselves invisible forms,
To spread your desolations out!  your birth
Was when the world sprang out of Chaos!  storms,
That in its infancy in wasting swarms
Made ruin on its front, and ravage dark,
Were born of you, when first the Sun, that warms
The Universe, came into life.  The ark,
That held the world, to you &mdash; was as a seaman's bark.

Your power is not upon the land alone!
But ye stir up with your wide wings the Deep,
Which, but for you, would peacefully flow on,
And settle in a calm, unruffled sleep.
But ye do make the slanting surges leap,
And throw their driving foam towards the shore,
And pile your trophies there; if ye would keep
Your pinions still, the waves would rage no more,&mdash;
Rush but your voices, Winds!  ye still old Ocean's roar.

Why will ye rise, ye desolating Winds!
And breed the storms that shake the earth and sea;
Man trusts him to the Ocean, &mdash; but he finds
That ye are terrible &mdash; and fain would flee
And seek out shelter on the land; but ye
Uplift your wings, and bear him far away
And wreck the youth, so beautiful and free!
Ye glory in your power, and toss the snowy spray
Upon that pitching hull, and bid it go its way.

Ye are not pinioned to the sea and land,
But sweep along the immeasurable space,
And drive the clouds, as with a mighty hand,&mdash;
Which make the blue-lined sky their resting-place,
And lie, like columns on a curving base.
Ye drive the eagle from his eyrie-rock,
And strew his path with feathers in the race;
Ye strip the garnished universe, and mock
The thunderbolts that rend the earth with mighty shock;

And they fly past, &mdash; for Death upon them rides,
And darts them through the troubled, brightening air;
And as they speed their flaming course, he guides
And hurls them to earth, and lays it bare.
And then ye rise, ye blasting Winds!  and dare
To hold the fire within your robes, and bow
The fairest pinnacles of earth, and wear
The stamp of the Destroyer on their brow;
And where was life and beauty &mdash; there are ruins now.

Why will ye rage upon the fertile Earth
And sweep the fields, and shake the loaded trees?
Why will ye sport, and sadden by your mirth
And make Man tremble, when he far off sees
That ye are on the deep with gentle breeze,
And coming on to desolate the shore,
And ye do come!  Then every creature flees
To his own covert, while ye howl and roar,&mdash;
And Man is loud your depredations to deplore.

Oh cease, ye Winds!  Your revelry is death!
And Mirth smiles faintly on the land and waves..
When ye go forth, like pestilential breath,
Lay thousands low, and howl above their graves.
But ye have music, Winds! &mdash; Where Nilus raves,
The hollow rushes rang, as ye swept o'er;
His waves stole on to hear your headstrong slaves&mdash;
Then burst their bounds, and rushed upon the shore.
Sing on, ye Winds!  if ye &mdash; have music, as of yore.

What shapes, ye unseen Winds!  do ye assume,
When ye put on the warrior-waves their crests&mdash;
Or when ye rise on land, and spread your gloom!
A giant's form ye take! &mdash; that never rests,
And walks the earth as with a stride, and wrests
Creation from the weak, and bids them bow!
Ye came from GOD, and do His high behests,
And ye are terrible to high and low.
Blow on for aye, blow on! &mdash; ye winnow as ye blow!
