Beneath a heath-thatch'd roof blight Aunia dwelt,
Her locks were carrot, and her eyes were blue,
Robust her frame, the picture of rude health,
Nor pain, nor ache, the buxom damsel knew.

No vapors, spleen, or fell chimera dire,
E'er fill'd her head, or broke her nightly rest;
Her heart ne'er sicken'd with a jealous ire,
To see or friend, or rival better dress'd.

A muslin cap with ribbon deck'd so gay,
A white lawn apron, and a cotton gown,
Brogue-maker's pumps to wear on holy-day,
Or going to fair, or mass, or market-town.

These were th' utmost of her humble wishes,
For, she of dress the luxury ne'er learn'd,&mdash;
Brought up to milk, and churn, and wash the dishes,
Her living by her industry she earn'd.

Now Dermot lov'd the maid, with such an air
Did she the pratoes teem, and skim the pot,
And when she clean'd her face, and comb'd her hair
No village lass was comlier, well I wot.

To fair, and wake, and pattern, all around,
Dermot repair'd, his cudgel in his fist;
And oft at rustic feats the victor crown'd,
His comrades envied him the lasses kiss'd.

O'er all, in dancing, he'd acquir'd renown,
And of his native village was the boast;
For he in dancing cou'd dance others down,
And he danc'd best, 'twas said, who danc'd the most.

Thus all-accomplish'd Dermot made advance
To Aunia, as she trudg'd thro' pratoe trench,
Shrugging his shoulders he looked half askaunce,
And wiping well his mouth he kiss'd the wench.

Fie, Dermot, Aunia cries, the basket's down,
(A basket she had got of pratoes full)
Fekins!  you act just like a filthy clown,
Zooks!  how you tumble one, and towse, and pull.

Now off the basket came, the pratoes spill'd,
Dermot, abash'd, deplores what he has done,
And angry Aunia, tho' with pass'on fill'd,
Squating, to pick them up had just begun.

When Dermot, as he help'd her, to the maid
Himself with soothing accents thus address'd.
Your own Dermot don't astore upbraid,
For ogh!  my honey, I'm enough distress'd.

Troth love has given my stomach such a kick,
I'll die as sure as eggs if you're unkind,&mdash;
Of it I am as full as any tick,
Ogh, hone!  I have lost myself, I find.

Then do cuddeen look kind, and speak me plain,
You cou'dn't like one whose warm heart you've got?
And tho' a body's but a simple swain,
I've a choice garden, and a cosy cot!

Now, as he Aunia held by both her hands,
A modest moment, when he stopp'd she stood;
Then without hems, or haws, or ifs, or ands,
To his last question she reply'd &mdash; I cou'd&mdash;

Out of my skin with joy I now cou'd jump!
The happy youth with extasy did cry;
Feel how my heart against my ribs does thump,
For you I'll live &mdash; or may I never die.

On Sunday next, when we go dress'd to mass,
We'll get it done; what does my Aunia say?
To which, in jocund strain, the merry lass,
Cry'd, be it then to-morrow, or to-day.

Thus having settled their high love affairs,
Dermot help'd Aunia's basket on her head,
Then whistling to his sack and work repairs,
And on the Sunday after they were wed.
