PART I.
To suffering fall'n, though formed the heir of joy,
A prey to ills that menace and destroy,
The midnight pest that walks in ghastly power,
The viewless arrows of the noontide hour;
To sorrow's protean forms, debasing cares,
The thousand wounds the erring spirit bears,
The storms that lower o'er life's eventful way,
And dim the etherial flame that animates his clay;
Man &mdash; still the child of heaven, allowed to prove
A filial interest in his Maker's love;
Feels the full influence of his watchful care,
That lightens sorrow, and forbids despair:
Then, since He tempers ev'ry blast that blows,
Bids the keen thorn intrude, but spares the rose;
Since heaven's glad sun-beams thro' the tempest shine,
And He who strikes pours forth the oil and wine;
Why to the winds should hope and peace be flung?
And why the balm that soothes our wounds unsung?

Benevolence!  thou heaven-descended guest,
Blest in thyself, in blessing doubly blest,
Thine is the balm that stills frail nature's strife,
And robs of half their sting the woes of life.

Yet man, vain man, will choose the serpent's food,
Still following evil, still forsaking good;
And noblest minds, unchecked, with innate force,
But start with wildest range from wisdom's course;
E'en now HIS name our eyes with sorrow fills,
Whose sun hath sunk behind Morea's hills;
(Alas!  that giant spots obscured it's ray,
And dimmed the promise of, immortal day);
To grandeur born, but left in youth's gay pride,
Where vice and folly roll their ebbless tide,
Where heartless self prefers her constant claim,
And frontless fashion consecrates her shame;
He judged the many by the worthless few,
And his soul sickened at the sad review:
Scorning the world, he strove in vain to rise;
Above the earth, but far beneath the skies,
Struck with terrific jar the matchless strings,
That else had raised the soul on rapture's wings,
And poured the fire that through his bosom ran,
In blasting fierceness, 'gainst his brother man;
Pronounced all human good a worthless claim,
And blest Benevolence, an empty name.
Nor great the marvel, on unhallowed ground,
Who e'er hath sought her steps, or seeking, found!
Her's the calm scenes where passion's tempests cease,
And Virtue's sons possess their souls in peace.
Not on the rock the violet rears its form,
To parching sun exposed, and sweeping storm;
But pours its fragrance o'er the lowly dell,
Where with soft lapse the living waters well,
And the coy maid, serene in artless truth,
Crowns with it's sweets the laughing brow of youth.

Yet hence, since Genius closed his eyes to light,
Involved his soul in self-created night,
In stiffnecked scorn of kindred being, still
Traduced its good, and magnified its ill,
Would sickly folly yet the strain prolong,
And blend his errors with her vapid song:
Hence the vain crowd, whom nature's will denies
To sound his deep, absorbing harmonies,
Would feebly ape on ev'ry tinkling wire,
The lofty discords of his mighty lyre.

Peace be thy lot, great spirit!  which in vain,
Thy way-ward nature strove on earth to gain;
Had blest Benevolence thy soul refined,
Shone through the chaos of thy darkened mind;
Tinged the full springs whence thought and feeling flow,
And stirred them from their utmost depths below,
How had they poured around their treasured worth,
And with their lavish tides enriched the earth:
By the deep magic of thy potent strain,
Then hadst thou toiled, nor, haply, toiled in vain,
Not to debase our nature, but improve;
Raised the high song that taste and virtue love;
Bade thy large heart expand to all thy race,
Nor deemed the world its Maker loved to grace,
That world He once pronounced so good, so fair,
All evil, while his impress lingered there.

Bear record with me, ye primeval woods!
Ye age-crowned mountains, with your rushing floods!
Thou changeless ocean!  still in grandeur spread,
Where Time's third morning saw thy wondrous bed;
Thou sun!  whose blazing eye hath scanned the spheres
Through the wide circuit of six thousand years;
Since man has trod your heights, or ploughed your wave,
Or drank in light and joy the beam you gave;
Still have ye shewn your Mighty Maker near,
Nor left his name without a witness here.

Nor less the moral world.  Though hate and crime,
Twin fiends, have raged through all descending time;
Though brazen war hath bound with tyrant rule,
Earth's great and noble to his sanguine school;
Though dark o'er earth the night of error spread,
Though truth in terror veiled her radiant head,
Still, bright Benevolence, with light divine,
Through every age hath shone, and still shall shine;
That heavenly light, O sun!  which, like thy flame,
Proclaims the brighter source from whence it came.

True, Eden blooms no more for man below,
And tears must water what the passions sow:
Illusive happiness!  why tempt our eyes?
The mighty price we pay, but miss the prize;
From land to land, through danger, toil, and pain,
Thy votary seeks thee, but he seeks in vain;
With hope renewed, he tempts the raging sea,
And Ocean answers, "She is not with me;"
Why wilt thou thus belie thy heavenly birth?
Why doth thy rainbow seem to rest on earth?
O, rather hide thee from our sight, or show
Thy beauties but from heaven to worlds below;
So man, assured, his fruitless search might spare,
Or, knowing where thou art, might seek thee there.

Deluded thus, in chains of darkness bound,
The prisoned angels urge their hopeless round;
For ages pent within the shadowy cone,
Where night and silence share the dreary throne;
Still pressing onward towards the verge of light,
(Whose just gradations check their eager flight)
E'en to the day, when bursting from the tomb,
Man, joined with angels, waits his final doom,
And whelmed beneath the blazing tempest's roar,
Earth hath no shadow left to guard them more.

Nor all is lost; though vain the hope to find
Ease for the fever of the restless mind,
That still, as linked to flesh, it onward fares,
The sad inheritance of sorrow shares;
Yet thou, Benevolence, canst soothe its grief,
Pour o'er its anguished feelings sweet relief,
Canst oft the threatened ills of life arrest,
And aid frail nature to endure the rest;
At times canst blunt misfortune's maddening goad,
And ease weak man of all his weary load:
Then, while his burdens thy kind arms employ,
The light heart dances to the notes of joy;
Those seraph sounds to us but rarely given,
Lest earth itself too far resemble heaven.

Blest power!  if man his own best interest knew,
Owned thy kind rule, and to himself were true,
What scenes of wonder might thy hand unfold,
More bright than dreaming sages e'er foretold,
And time behold a race of ages run,
To shame the fabled reign of Vesta's son.

E'en now through earth thy spirit warmer glows.
Deeper and wider still thy influence flows,
And half the horrors of departed years,
Are heard, and wondered at, like childhood's fears;
And who but thou could meet the increasing rage
Of man's worst passions, who but thou assuage?

What were the Patriots' boast, if wanting thee?
Mark Rome's best citizen, when Rome was free;
The elder Cato, who in stubborn pride
His country loved, but hated all beside,
Nor aught could quell his savage thirst of blood,
Or calm his ruthless soul while Carthage stood.
How clement Julius from his glory fell,
And stained his fame, let Ariovistus tell.
Fen princely Titus, upright, wise, and brave,
When free-born Judah spurned the name of slave,
Stooped to revenge to gild repulse and loss,
And nailed her gallant thousands to the cross.

Can high Philosophy the heart subdue,
Or mould its powers to thee and nature true?
No, the vain efforts of her lofty art
May rule the head, but not thy realm, the heart;
(Weak as yon northern streamer's idle ray,
That shines but warms not on its airy way)
High may her lofty battlements aspire,
The wise may worship, and the good admire,
But let low interest sap the towering walls,
Soon prone in dust the baseless structure falls;
Let powerful impulse, that still ready waits,
With sudden onset shake the feeble gates,
The scarce resisting barriers wide are cast,
Like fairy ramparts fleeting with the blast,
And leave the invaded soul o'erwhelmed, betrayed,
In woe more helpless from their trusted aid.

Nor Genius, though like thee, from heaven he came,
Can wield thy sceptre, or thy honours claim;
To one blest bosom, if like friends ye come,
And claim the mansion as your favoured home,
By thee refined, his fires may purer glow,
More widely shine, more lovely radiance throw,
And shew at large to man's admiring eyes,
What scenes of beauty from your compact rise;
But, when they beam o'er grovelling folly's way,
Or light the soul where whirlwind passions play,
They gild a chaos, and the scene deform,
Like the dread star that marshalls on the storm.

Gods of the earth!  to you hath heaven assigned
Part of its own high power to bless mankind;
Each in his sphere, as He, your Lord and their's,
Extends o'er all his goodness and his cares.
If on your throne Benevolence preside,
Ye spread the blessings of her empire wide;
But if, bewildered with your dizzy height,
On self alone ye fix your gloating sight,
On feelings, laws, and rights, besotted tread,
Till living slaves may envy freemen dead;
Or if, her rule contemned, through pride ye err,
Despise the sceptre, and the sword prefer,
And bid its ever hungry edge devour,
Far, as with hell to aid, extends your power;
The desert's deadly breath, the sea's dread rock,
The whirlwind's fury, and the earthquake's shock,
Though suffering nature sicken at the view,
Well nigh are blessings when compared with you.

Behold the wond'rous man, whose single mind,
In lonely greatness triumphed o'er his kind,
Forced crafty factions to its might to yield,
Tore the wan lilies from their ancient field,
And raised his ravening eagles in their place,
That gorged the richest blood of all his race;
And vampire-like had bowed their glory low,
Had once their purple banquet ceased to flow.
Could'st thou, sweet Charity, with him prevail,
Or weigh with power, in wild ambition's scale?
Vainly thy genial wings had brooded o'er
The triple ice that bound his bosom's core;
Lost was thy voice, while e'en in fancy rang
Around his charmed ear the battle's clang.
No power could stay the spoiler on his path,
Till outraged nature armed her in her wrath,
"Lo, the sweet pleasures of my tranquil reign,
My smiling beauty woo'd his soul in vain,
And the stern monarch of the iron crown,
Now seeks my fury and defies my frown;
Rouse ye, my terrors, from your grim repose!
Awake, ye whirlwinds!  hither haste, ye snows!
Rise in your rage, sweep o'er yon human sea,
Avenge my children, let my earth be free!"

Free!  is she free?  was this the end decreed,
To break the sword, and bid the scourge succeed?
To strike the kingly eagle in his flight,
And bind the victim for the craven kite?
See dragged beneath a dastard tyrant's wheel,
(Once Christian Europe's champion) high Castile.
Thou too, Italia, is thy glory dead,
How long must dust and ashes soil thy head?
Still bound beneath the Austrian despot's feet,
While to thy soul the cankered irons eat,
To heaven ascends thy tortured people's voice,
(Shade of Arminius, hear it and rejoice!)
Yet though to dust deprest, the slave of slaves,
In vain thou shalt not cry to Him who saves;
The time shall come, 'tis past the mighty word,
The heavens have spoken and the earth has heard;
Concurring signs proclaim th' approaching day,
Hope's eager eye may mark its dawning ray,
The day when all below, like those above,
Sons of one parent, shall like brothers love;
Then, blest Benevolence, no more defied,
The last fell tyrant on the throne of pride,
Raised into man, shall own her mild controul,
Or mourn in dust the madness of his soul.

Bright friend of man, her sacred presence flings
Unearthly beauty o'er created things;
Her's is the praise if less distracting fears
Beset the path of life, if nature's tears
Be dried, or fewer fall, if earth can wear
Her robe of plenty, and reward our care,
If justice dwell below, and man may tread
Erect, nor lawless power nor treachery dread;
She is our friend, while all the spurious race,
That claim her kindred, but her name disgrace,
Leave but a record to succeeding times,
Of savage virtues, or of splendid crimes.

But fame delights not her, nor splendours please;
With blessings laden, clad with smiling peace,
In quiet beauty through the world she goes,
Not less the friend of all, were all her foes;
Her deeds concealing, till their worth appears,
By the fair monuments of peace she rears.

So grows the lily on the cultured plain,
So shines resplendent 'midst the floral reign,
Raised by the added strength each moment brings,
With silent progress to perfection springs,
Till, fair as snow on Alpine summits seen,
Bursts forth her beauty from its leafy screen,
And towering bright o'er summer's radiant bands,
Complete in grace the lovely wonder stands.

Jocund and gay, down pleasure's sparkling stream
Float the light children of the world, nor dream
Of death or danger there, nor care to guide
The flaunting vessel o'er the treacherous tide;
And lo!  the wretch of all but life bereft,
Cast helpless on the unfriendly shore, and left
To fate or fortune, for his cry in vain
Would win him audience from that heartless train;
Blows fortune's gale, their silken sails are set,
They hear but heed not, pass him, and forget.
Then comes the sickness of the soul, the vexed
And wounded spirit, and despair is next;
O, if the world had ought of good or great,
Still would he struggle, nor submit to fate;
Then, when Benevolence with ready hand
Binds all his wounds, and bids him rise and stand,
Her lovely smile that bright assurance gives,
And, cheered by her, the child of sorrow lives.

By hope inspired, by sanguine feeling flushed,
Full many a youth towards Fame's high fane hath rushed,
But felt, while glowing with celestial flame,
Neglect's damp mildew on his blighted name;
E'en thus to hapless Chatterton it clung,
Till want's keen fangs upon his vitals hung;
(So to the antlered monarch of the wood,
The panther cleaves and drains his vital blood).
O, had Benevolence beheld, when pride
The dreadful secret to her sight denied,
Her voice had bid the scowling fiend depart,
Her glance, which lightens through the rayless heart,
Relumed the beacon Hope hath planted there,
The leading star of life, the charm 'gainst dark despair.

The orphan see, who, friendless and cast down,
Hath borne scorn's cutting smile, and pride's dark frown;
With feelings crushed and bruised, he seems to own
A heart insensate as the passive stone
O'er which he treads; yet deep his spirit burns,
Curses for threats, and bate for taunts returns;
Like one who walks in sleep, his course he bends,
Darkling, nor asks a guide, nor thinks of friends;
But, if Benevolence should bid him wake,
And rouse him, for his own, for others' sake;
Cheer his lorn bosom with her tenderest zeal,
And soothe his wayward spirit, till he feel
The smile of tenderness &mdash; the charm of worth;
Then burst the streams of sweet affection forth,
While all the finer sympathies that thrive
In gentler natures, at their touch revive,
And Love's best fruits where'er their course is traced,
Enrich that heart so late a barren waste.

These are her chosen deeds &mdash; best pleased to stray
Where none but those she blesses mark her way;
Yet not from good by fear or shame withheld,
Still on she journies, though at times, compelled
To rend the veil that shrouds her form away,
And bare her features in the light of day:
Hence, with her name inscribed, fair structures stand,
Her praise diffusing through a grateful land.
Here the sad victim of seductive art,
Her vice forgets, and learns a purer part,
Snatched from a vortex, where her utmost skill
And failing strength, had seen her sinking still;
Or, if at last they saved, had left her such,
As Pity's lowly self must stoop to touch.

Hath not thy angel step, in virtue bold,
Passed the dark limit of the felon's hold,
Some entrance seeking to his darker mind,
Dared the dank prison's breath that way to find;
And worse, the moral leprosy that clave
Around, in Misery's home, and Virtue's grave!
Nor ceased upon his hardened heart to pour
Thy kindest counsels, and thy purest lore;
Till the stern Ruffian, whose obdurate breast,
Scarce held one kindly feeling for its guest,
Hath wept, and owned his country's broken law
Was just, nor should its awful claim withdraw;
Yet humbly hoped, his full lustration o'er,
And cleansed his foulness, to contract no more.

O Earth!  how long upon thy beauteous face
Hath slavery ranged, destroyer of thy race;
Long had Benevolence, with many a tear,
Surveyed the horrors of his wild career.
Hopeless to crush, though armed in nature's right,
His demon prowess by her single might;
Yet oft she struck, as oft repulsed and foiled
Scarce felt and harmless had her blow recoiled;
Till sorrowing, not despairing, at the past,
Strong in her whole collected power, at last
Her hand hath pierced him, and the vigorous dart
Palsies his arm, and rankles in his heart.

So, when as poets feign, huge Python roll'd
O'er the new world his vast unmeasur'd fold,
The bright far-darting God assumed his arms,
To rid the nations of their dire alarms;
Though his fierce shafts the scaly harness tore,
And drank from many a fount the bursting gore,
Long in his might secure, the stubborn foe
Defied the furies of the dreadful bow;
Nor, till just doubtful of his matchless strength,
Half scornful, half incensed, the power at length,
With full celestial might his weapon drew,
And the last arrow of the quiver flew,
O'erpowered, the monster pressed the bloody sod,
Yielding, &mdash; and barely yielding, &mdash; to a God.

What State, that bade surrounding rivals yield,
In arts and arms, supreme on either field;
What Queen of earth, that saw the kingdoms bow,
Where rose, in awful state, her crowned brow,
E'er gave fell slavery on mankind to feed,
And shunned the ruin that herself decreed!
Still doth the fiend his deadly nature bear;
Still shall his fangs his parents' vitals tear;
Shall waste the strength that outward force defied,
And sap the deep foundations of her pride.

All beauteous Greece, whose image stands enshrined
In the best feelings of each generous mind,
Though fierce she strove for freedom, nor in vain,
Forced many a wretch sad slavery's draught to drain,
Till time, revolving slow, the period fixed,
Held to her lip the bitter cup she mixed;
How long the moral pest o'erhung her shore,
How long the taint her spotted garment bore!
When Europe saw, as if at later day,
Not yet the damning spot were washed away,
On stern Lycurgus' seat the Othman throned,
And, drop for drop, the Helot's blood atoned.

When Rome, as bright her sun of glory rode,
Spread her broad shadow over land and flood,
Like some vast whirlpool, with incessant din,
Drew, like huge waves, the crowding nations in;
Gleaned the full wealth in conquered kingdoms found,
To hoard, or fling in lavish waste around;
Herself her idol, every foe a slave,
From Syria's forests to the Ebro's wave,
Despair's deep groan she heard, and sorrow's wail:
What shrieks, what curses rent the noontide gale;
What streams of gore defiled the horrid sands
Of her fell circus, where, in marshalled bands,
The fated brave their richest blood must spill,
Like brutes, to glut their lords, more brutal still;
Nor e'en soft woman turned her gaze aside:
Hence moral sense polluted, bloated pride,
Avarice, and cruelty, the coward's vice;
And the high Roman bowed, or bore his price,
Till weak, and sunk beneath the sense of shame,
In all but name a slave, the spoiler came.

Kind Charity, though all from misery fly,
Where woe is felt, thy step is ever nigh,
And none but he who needs thy smile can tell
How swift it calms our sorrows, and how well;
But in the heart, whose powers are all thy own,
Are thy best gifts, thy highest pleasures known.
The worldling's heartless joys, the hero's wreath,
Low self-contempt, or withering pangs bequeath;
While thy delights unmingled peace ensure,
They bring no pangs, and where they find them, cure;
Or if, since doubly blest thy votary goes,
High heaven afflict him with redoubled woes,
While others' wounds with gentlest care he heals,
Soft o'er his own thy magic influence steals,
Bathing the spirit in its soothing spell,
Like dreamy music from the Eolian shell,
When, half entranced, the awakening sense in vain
Would tell if earth 'or heaven awoke the strain.

Nor lives there One, fond hope would augur yet,
On whose hard heart thy seal was never set;
Well nigh at times by vice and crime effaced,
Yet oft, where least expected, strongest traced.

Warm social Power!  thy raptures ne'er could swell
The idiot dreamings of the hermit cell;
The generous breast where thou hast fixed thy throne
Bears not its feelings for itself alone,
From loathed unnatural solitude must fly,
Or in their living grave the affections die.

Thus not around, like nature's balm, descends
That deep and deadly stillness, that portends
Destruction nigh, when trembling earth appears,
In sad dejection lost, and sunk in fears;
Prescient of ill, as if within her view
(Though yet unfledged) the full-plumed tempest flew;
As if her quickened senses from afar,
When the fell demons of the airy war,
Exulting from their sounding caverns spring,
Caught the faint rustle of each poising wing,
As, waiting all their powers, sublime they sail,
In horrid silence, on the pausing gale.

And see the wretch whom, when destruction lowered,
From each pursuing surge that o'er him towered,
With speed outstripping death, the raving blast
With headlong fury o'er the waters cast,
And dashed exhausted on the savage shore,
Where human form ne'er pressed the soil before:
Saved!  he is happy; fear and danger past;
But only he is saved; then comes at last,
Heart-eating loneliness, the worst of ills,
Whose calm as surely as the tempest kills.
O better far that his ill-fated form
Had sunk beneath the daemons of the storm;
Or, from the ghastly monsters of the wave,
Had found a bloody, but an instant grave,
When all his spirit's yearnings, smothered long,
Burst with resistless fervour from his tongue.
O mark the stony gaze, the mute despair,
As die the sounds upon the desert air;
Or, worse, arrested in their onward track,
Echo, in heartless mockery, flings them back.
His ardent feelings quenched, his heart, though great,
Oppressed by all their dead and chilling weight,
(Like that dead sea whose struggling swell expires,
'Neath the  ashes of Gomorrah's fires,)
Longs but to join the clod from whence it came,
Differing but little now, and soon to be the same.

Yet, though the haunts of men present the field
Where grow thy fairest fruits, too oft they yield
A deadly crop of selfish griefs and cares,
That blights thy promise, and thy strength impairs,
Retirement aids thy growth, and he who holds
Converse with nature, and her beauty folds
To his warm heart, to thy sweet call attends,
Benevolence!  for she and thou are friends.

Lo!  Britain's ardent son her standard rears,
Round the wide watery world her trident bears,
Surveys great Nature in her noblest forms,
Dwells with her billows, communes with her storms,
Tracks her dread footsteps to their inmost place,
And sees, unveiled, the wonders of her face;
Sees, not in parts, but scans the amazing whole;
And, mark the simple grandeur of his soul!
His is the expansive heart, the candid tongue,
Uncramped by subtlety, unwarped to wrong,
All sordid views above, all petty strife,
The grace, the safeguard, of domestic life;
His country only, claims a dearer care,
Prompt at her call to suffer or to dare, 
Pleased for her weal to yield his patriot breath,
Hers while he lives, and doubly hers in death:
So lived, so died, alas!  the wise, the good.
The just, the brave, the noble Collingwood!

There tower Helvetia's barriers, on whose heights,
From the flushed west such rosy radiance lights,
Which, fixed in stern repose, have caught the ray,
Since low in ocean sunk the first-born day;
Where, unprofaned by man, the eternal snow,
Waits but his whispered word to plunge below;
Where each vain voice, from earth or air that breaks,
Is hushed, and Nature, mighty Mother, speaks.

They heard her voice, her bold, her hardy race;
Heroes, whom freedom's brightest triumphs grace,
She raised their souls above the despot's frown,
She nerved their arm to strike the tyrant down,
Bade their high hearts with patriot ardour burn,
And, heaven's best gift achieved, she bade them turn,
Command the unhallowed strife of war to cease,
(Then only glorious when it strikes for peace,)
Seek the lone stranger on his trackless road,
Press the kind shelter of the safe abode,
Climb the dread cliff, surmount the misty wreath,
And point the pilgrim to his goal beneath;
And, honoured thus and graced their stranger care,
Bound joyful homeward, for their hearts were there;
And with each virtue bless the social hearth
That, since our parents fell, survives on earth.

Nor, if the heart Benevolence inspires,
Can earth engross or hold its vast desires.
When mortal cares, their stern commission done,
Fade in dim distance with their herald sun;
When Hesper, rising bright, on airs of balm
Floats on through ether, 'midst the holy calm,
And sheds o'er peaceful earth the trembling ray
That lights sweet evening on her dewy way,
While all around fresh worlds emerging seem,
Tempering the approaching shades with silvery gleam,
And each light breeze its fluttering breath that wakes
More deeply marks the blest repose it breaks:
With what pacific power doth She ascend,
The heart's high throne, and bid the passions bend!
Hushed is the bosom's war, the world's hoarse din,
And peace without reflects the peace within
The spirit, rapt beyond earth's shadowy bound,
Lives through the mighty whole that deepens round;
Expands in Love to life wherever known,
From man's low dwelling to the seraph's throne,
Linked to its weal with thousand tenderest ties,
By awful nature's mystic sympathies.

Yet, though all worlds thy kindly feelings share,
One little world is thine, dear, sacred, where
Thy spirit rests.  O that his feeble verse,
Who falters forth thy praises, could rehearse
Thoughts worthy thee!  O that his strain could show,
As well he feels it, what to Love we owe!

Behold yon blooming girl, whom hastening Time
Now just has ushered to her maiden prime:
With vernal swell her gentle bosom breaks
Its icy fetters, and new life partakes.
Then rise young thoughts, and fond imaginings,
Soft fluttering wishes try their new-born wings,
Mingled with feelings undefined, and tossed
In one sweet chaos, blended all and lost.
Through her warm breast the mixed emotions play,
And wile her from her former self away,
Yet know not what their aim, nor where their home,
Till He, the One, the kindred spirit come:
Then works the spell, as, with concentrate rays,
The convex crystal pours the living blaze;
The varied elements, arranged, combined,
Put their new nature on, at once defined;
And the soft passion pouts through all her heart
Its sweet anxieties, its honied smart:
In Her its pure achievements stand displayed,
Devoted, ardent, constant, rightly weighed;
A richer prize than orient mines afford,
Yea, more than kingdoms to her bosom's lord.

Oft, when fond hopes congenial hearts employ,
Frowns the stern world upon the promised joy;
Shuts from its happier paths their steps unblest,
And to those eyes that seek a humble rest
Presents a dreary vista, waste, prolonged,
With clouds o'erhung, with hostile shadows thronged;
No cheering ray appears, no ground of trust,
And their sad hearts confess the picture just.
Yet Love full oft, like the pure diamond's shine,
Which brightest lightens through the darksome mine,
Sheds o'er the sombre scene a radiant hue,
More sweet than fortune's sunshine ever threw,
And round the trusting heart a glory throws,
That charms its griefs, and bids its cares repose:
Then flows their bliss in one o'erwhelming tide,
Then mortal ills behold their power defied.
Where now the fears that ruled with sickening sway,
The spirit's sad forebodings, where are they?
The clouds that made the world affection's tomb?
The spectral forms that lowered along the gloom?
All, all are gone, and earth an Eden seems,
Bright with their raptures, peopled with their dreams.

Mysterious Power!  thy spirit, unconfined,
Fills the wide regions of immortal mind;
Beyond the shade Time's ample pinions cast,
Nor finds creation's myriad worlds too vast
For its unbounded yearnings.  Not the less
Earth's narrowest limits canst thou stoop to bless,
And with such joy life's scantiest portion store,
That man's insatiate soul can ask no more.
How dost thou all time's varied woes atone,
When first fond hearts their kindred feeling own,
And all forgot the future and the past,
While strong affection's burning transports last,
Pour thy full spirit, smile at adverse fate,
And live through ages in a moment's date.

Say, is there aught can yield superior bliss?
Can nature boast a thrill more dear than this?
Yes, here!  where sorrow dwells a constant guest,
A purer joy is found to fill the breast.
Mark yon sweet infant pair, that share the boon
Of dewy sleep, at summer's ardent noon:
That arm beneath the sister form outspread,
With pigmy power to guard the younger head;
Those dimpling cheeks, where slumber's gentle breath
Has fanned to livelier tint health's bloomy wreath;
Those eyes that flash as when Aurora wakes,
Whence now, though veiled, a chastened lustre breaks;
Soft opened lips, approaching fond and sweet,
As at that roseate porch their cherub souls would meet.
There bends the parent:  on that sacred spot,
His world is centered, and his cares forgot;
On the loved scene his labouring spirit dwells,
And his eye kindles, and his bosom swells
And heaves, till nature's self too weak to bear
The rushing joy, sublimes it to a tear.

Here doth affection triumph, here supply
Earth's finest, firmest, most enduring tie;
That sacred tie, through doubt and danger tried,
Nor chance nor change can loose, nor time divide;
E'en when the sentence comes, severely just,
Which back to parent earth commands our dust,
The summoned spirit, pausing ere she part,
Ere time's last feeling leave the failing heart,
Shall bless the cherished medium that conveys
Her long loved earthly name to.  future days,
(E'en as her mortal date, though fleeting fast,
Hath linked that future with the faded past,)
And when to earth, from yonder blissful seat,
She bends the look where love and pity meet,
Shall mark her lineage, and, unblamed, bestow
A dearer portion of that love below.

There is a spot where heaven still deigns to shower
The first, best blessings of its guardian power;
Rich in the calm delights that win their way
O'er the perturbed spirit, and array
Their charmed might 'gainst all the woes and cares
Which every child of Adam dreads and bears:
The home of wedded Love, the guarded ground,
Where all of bliss that dwells on earth is found.
Here, Love, without his sting, descends from high,
Folds his wild wing, and lays his arrows by;
He stills the throbbing heart when griefs annoy;
His sacred power exalts the meanest joy,
And gives, with higher, holier, influence fraught,
Its tone to feeling, and its cast to thought;
Even as the common light, unmarked, that shone,
Through the pure prism's enchanting medium thrown,
Bursts to celestial hues, evolving here
The latent glories of a brighter sphere.

Here may the way-worn spirit find repose;
The loveliest rest that man, the wanderer, knows;
Though cherished friends, who nearer aim the blow,
Should wound more deeply than the distant foe;
Though slander's fiend her blasting venom fling,
Misfortune shade it with her dragon wing,
And all around in hopeless wreck be hurled,
The sweet Oasis of a desert world.

