Lo!  not a whisper's heard!  the restless wind
Suspends its murmurs thro' the greenwood shade;
Nature is silent, and the wearied hind
Within his lonely cot in peace is laid.

No contemplation fills the tranquil soul;
No glaring object strikes the resting eye,
No sound the ear; the wind now spurns control,
And hushed in silence rebel passions lie.

Within yon hamlet now the poor enjoy
The balmy bliss that flies the troubled great;
Their quiet breasts no factious cares annoy;
No guilt disturbs, no sorrows agitate.

Around their humble couch an infant train
Breath their light slumbers, and the airy dreams
Float unconstrained &mdash; ah!  seldom big with pain,
Of pouring pleasure in exhaustless streams.

The sceptered peasant rules in mimic state;
Perhaps the monarch serves the meanest slave.&mdash;
Ah!  what avails the glory of the great?
Now lost in sleep for ever in the grave.

Sleep on in peace.  Ah!  happy ye that sleep!
But, lo!  athwart the gloom, yon twinkling light
Bespeaks it joy or pain?  Laugh they, or weep,
Who hover round it in the dead of night?

Perhaps some happy swain to day has led
Home to his cot the long desired fair;
In festive joys the nightly hours have fled,
In rustic mood around the youthful pair!

Ah!  no; perhaps some aged sire is laid,
Breathless and faint, amid his children's cries;
His faultering tongue with blessings loads their heads,
Ask'd of kind Heaven with his uplifted eyes.

"Go, pious offspring!  and restrain these tear,
I fly to regions of eternal bliss:
Heaven, in your favor, hears my dying prayers;
Take my last blessing in this clay cold kiss."

Perhaps some sage well skilled in nature's lore,
Now burns with watchful care the midnight oil;
Discovering systems yet unknown before,
Ardent he labours, and forgets his toil.

Some statesman, anxious for his country's weal,
Perhaps the fate of mighty empire scans;
His anxious brow no soft repose can feel,
While in his heart he weighs the various plans.

Perhaps some glow-worm on the verdant mead,
In gaudy pomp, its shining vest displays;
How easy 'tis our fancy to mislead,
Lost and bewildered in thought's endless maze!

Too apt, alas!  to follow glow-worm toys,
And quit the path which wisdom deigns to shew,
We leave behind us more substantial joys,
Nor, till too late, our fatal error know.

See, in the east the wish'd for dawn appears;
The azure sky is streaked with flaming red;
Each mortal rises now to diff'rent fares,
By fancy prompted, or by duty led.
