Hark!  'tis the signal knell of parting day;
The watchman faithful at his post we see;
A throng of idlers mingle at the play,
And leave the town to silence and to me.

Dark shades succeed the twilight's fainting gleam,
And the proud walls and lofty spires obscure;
Save where the lamp emits a feeble beam,
To light the stranger on his way secure.

Save that, where lov'd tapers incense raise,
And round devotion's holy altar shine,
Where Christians wont to chaunt their Maker's praise,
And meekly listen to his truth's divine.

Where tow'rs this Gothic structure to the sky,
And many a tomb its sacred walls surround;
Pensive I stray, where thousands moldering lie,
Beneath the stately monumental mound.

The hum of morn, that wakes the cares of day,
The crier's song, nor cannons thundering roar;
The rattling coach that shakes the paved way,
Shall rouse them from their lowly beds no more!

For them, no more, shall blaze the social fire,
Or pleasure's train the tedious hours beguile;
Nor beauty, wake to exstacy, the lyre,
Or cheer the soul desponding, with her smile.

Oft did their eloquence fair virtue guard,
Their valor oft, sweet innocence protect;
How rich did India's mines their toils reward,
How their gay palaces in splendor deck'd.

Let not proud envy pine, while some possess,
Their glitring wealth and elevated state
Nor penury mistake for happiness,
The glist'ning pomp and grandeur of the great.

The boast of pride, the pomp or royalty,
And beauty, wealth and power, await their doom;
And sink alike with frail morality,
The paths of human glory reach the tomb!

Nor ye, in whose cold breast, the love of fame,
Ne'er rous'd the dormant powers of the soul;
Impute it wrong, if tablets tell their name,
And mem'ry their illustrious deeds extol.

Tho' sculptur'd eulogy's, sublime essay,
Can ne'er re-animate the silent dead;
Yet emulation kindles at the lay,
That points to worth and valor's lowly bed.

For in this much frequented spot's conceal'd,
The sacred dust to fame and mem'ry dear;
The champions of the senate and the field,
With HAMILTON and LAWRENCE, slumber here.

Fair science dawn'd propitious on their brow,
Nor sage philosophy her spoils deni'd;
But ah!  too soon, did they in glory bow,
And sink in death, Columbia's boast and pride.

Full many a saint, with Heavenly thoughts inspir'd,
May, while in youth, be call'd to yield his breath,
Full many a hero with proud courage fir'd,
May still be doom'd to an untimely death.

Some Rev'rend sage, whose eloquence sublime,
Made many a stubborn Felix trembling weep;
The poet, statesman, now the spoils of time,
With faded beauty, here, promiscuous sleep.

'Twas their's to plead in virtue's heavenly cause,
And point the anxious soul to bliss above;
And those to list to popular applause,
That spoke a nation's gratitude and love.

Mark the proud fabric o'er their ashes plac'd,
Where Sculpture stands the pride of arts confest;
The muse's plaintive eulogy is trac'd,
That tells vain man, there thou shalt find thy rest.

Their names, their years, their exit and their deeds,
Engrav'd, in taste and elegance, appear,
And whilst the faithful line their mem'ry pleads,
Shall oft receive the tribute of a tear.

Yet in each feeling breast, shall still survive,
The fame and virtues of the fallen friend;
And his who fell at honour's shrine shall live,
When time and earthly honours have an end.

And should some passing stranger kind inquire
What cruel fate hath laid thee here so soon;
Or what misfortune quench'd thy glowing fire,
And caus'd thy brilliant sun to set at noon.

With tearful eye shall some survivor tell,
Oft have we seen him at our courts of state;
While crowds obey'd the signal of the bell,
To listen to his eloquent debate.

There at the forum, as in field he stood,
Like some tall pine or formidable oak,
That waves its top o'er the surrounding wood,
So look'd this champion as he fearless spoke.

One morn I miss'd him; vacant was his place,
In senate, church and mourning family;
Another came, yet no resembling trace,
Of our lamented HAMILTON was he.

The next with solemn dirge, thro' crowded streets,
Slow to the church yard throng'd, we saw him borne;
Approach and read the lay, that sad completes
His bright career, and whilst thou readest mourn.

THE EPITAPH.
Here lies entomb'd, beneath his native earth,
A man on whom both fame and fortune smil'd;
But fate had frown'd on his illustrious birth,
And honour mark'd him for her fav'rite child.

Bright both his talents and his virtues shone,
Resplendent as yon meteors of Heaven;
And since to error human nature's prone,
Then Oh!  may his and thine both be forgiven.

And now forbear; nor blame his lov'd shade,
For he has gone to make atonement due;
Lamented sage, thy precious life has paid,
The debt of nature and of error too.
