Hush'd is the warbling songstress of the night,
No noise, tumultuous, breaks the tranquil scene;
High o'er my head pale Luna sheds her light,
And casts a silv'ry lustre o'er the green.

In balmy sleep seal'd are the rustic's eyes,
(Such the reward of innocence alone)
And this the solemn time when spectres rise,
And leave their deeply-vaulted tombs of stone.

The wind has ceas'd to howl among the trees,
No village sounds disturb the midnight hour;
No lover's plaints sigh in the gentle breeze;
All nature owns soft slumber's balmy power.

Save when, from yonder abbey's Gothic tower,
Which now a heap of mould'ring ruins lie,
The dreary owlet from her moss-grown bower
Utters a wild, a melancholy cry.

What solemn awe steals on my pensive soul,
As now within its sacred porch I tread;
And, hark!  methinks I hear the midnight toll,
And see the sad procession of the dead!

And, hark!  I hear the deep mouth'd organ play
A requiem wild, and see the flowing pall;
And lo!  I hear its holy inmates pray,
Whilst gleams the torch upon the sacred wall.

And now, by visionary Fancy led,
I view the place where the high altar stood,
But every vestige is for ever fled,
Where once have knelt the holy brotherhood.

And now, perhaps, with steps profane I tread
Upon some father's deeply-vaulted grave;
Or, where the sacred abbot rests his head,
And Fancy touch'd, hear the funereal stave.

Lo!  as I view these solitary glooms,
How vain appears to me the breath of fame!
For here repose, within their marble tombs,
Who once could great and splendid titles claim.

Where are those self-devoted victims now,
Who once have burn'd with Superstition's flame;
Whose breasts have learn'd with every vice to glow,
Who scorn'd religion, but assum'd its name.

They too, with all the pomp that clos'd them round,
Have own'd of Time the sure destroying hand;
Nought but these tumbling fragments now are found,
Of all that once was thought superbly grand.

Lo!  here the gloomy night-crew builds her nest,
And noxious reptiles trace their winding ways;
Damp vapours now these blacken'd walls invest,
Which once resounded to the notes of praise.

Oh!  would th' ambitious, at this silent hour,
But view the objects of their anxious life;
Then would they bow no more to Glory's power,
Or seek for pleasure mid the walks of strife.

For me, may rural peace but mark my days,
And sweet content reign empress of my soul;
And joy domestic, with enlivening rays,
Still bless the halcyon moments as they roll!
