What though no orange grove its fragrance breathe,
Nor teeming olive ripen'd o'er thy head,
Nor bowering myrtle round our dwelling wreathe,
Nor tangling vines the purple cluster spread,&mdash;
Dearer this parent soil, that courts thy tread,
Than Lusia's balmy sweets and oily hoard,
Where sixteen burning summer suns have shed
Their glare, reflected on thy warrior sword,
Or on thy far abode their dazzling splendour poured.

Beamed not a brighter azure through the sky,
While on her course the gallant vessel bore,
And rose not as ethereal harmony
The rich rough tumult of the billows' roar,
When, boasting that rude surge, thy native shore
Heaved its bold barrier to the sportive spray,
And hope on airy pinion sped before,
Skimming the dales, in flowery vesture gay,
Over the distant hills, and fast and far away.

Thine Island home!  the soul of freedom now
Bids the full heart-pulse eloquently speak;
The breeze that fanned thine infant brow,
Her joyous welcome breathes upon thy cheek,
Where war and weariness no longer wreak
Their blighting wrath beneath a fervid sky;
Nor burns the Briton's scorn, condemned to seek
Truth's trampled pearl within a moral sty,
Or patriot honour couched in falsehood's blinking eye.

Thine island home!  aye, there are hearts to love
In grateful bosoms, that remember yet
How foe-girt Britain's martial call could move
Thy boyish hand the glittering steel to whet:
How thy unripened spring of manhood met
War's sternest blast of devastating breath;
As sapling oak on the rock's parapet,
Whose hardy strength the tempest nourisheth,
Matures its blooming pride amid the storms of death.

True, thou hast flourished in an alien soil,
A goodly seed in thankless desert sown,
Where ingrates, reckless of thy generous toil,
Uproot the shelter when the storm's o'erblown.
Our Island boasts an altar, rears a throne,
Meet for thy homage, worthy of thy care:
The black lethean draught her lips disown&mdash;
Not her's with parsimonious gripe to tear
The guerdon from thy brow, that victory planted there.

Days we have seen &mdash; and they were days of joy,
Bright as the foam that specks a summer sea,
And profitless &mdash; when 'twas my fond employ
To tune a busy baby lyre to thee.
Oh!  many a sigh hath marred the minstrelsy,
While their slow course the weary seasons led&mdash;
A bitter cup in wisdom blent for me,
By Him, who, mindful of compassion, spread
The panoply unseen around thy favoured head.

A sunny gleam absorbs the trickling rain,
While my glad lips the Patriarch's joy renew;
"I thought not to behold thy face again,&mdash;
Lo, God hath giv'n thine offspring to my view!"
To Him, the Just, the Faithful, and the True,
Sole Saviour, be the praise: &mdash; yet while I deem
A long deep debt of grateful love is due
To thee, my Brother, doth it not beseem
To let this closing chord reverberate the theme?
