PART II.
From the loved vale, where all his pleasures rest,
'Gainst the stern cliff, the traveller bends his breast;
Turns from his upward path the eager eye,
Where first his neighbouring fields beneath him lie;
More distant, soon upon his vision break,
The purple vineyard, and the flashing lake,
Dazzling, as though the mid-day monarch gave,
His own superfluous splendours to the wave;
Still farther sweep, as mount his labouring feet,
The umbered forest, and the upland sweet,
Till, gained the summit of the frowning steep,
Whence far in prospect rolls the boundless deep,
Launched on the depths of space, the visual ray,
In vast unmeasured distance dies away.

And man's dim eye, o'er bounded nature's face,
The course of high Benevolence may trace;
But, when it opens from superior ground,
On scenes infinity alone can bound,
Can see (since more all mortal power transcends)
But whence she comes and where her spirit tends;
For all too weak created sight appears,
To trace her progress through celestial spheres.

In stupor sunk the cheated nations lay,
And darkened ages closed around her way,
In deadliest bonds the souls of men were cast,
And subtle priestcraft held the fetters fast:
Fair Learning, too, in death-like trance was flung,
And droning monks a drowsy requiem sung;
Nor broke that sleep lethargic, till began
The moral earthquake that re-modelled man,
Shook superstition to her native hell,
Raised heaven's unsullied altar where she fell,
Bade bright Benevolence assert her sway,
And o'er benighted nations pour the day.

As first the darkened mind her spirit stirred,
Struggling towards light and hope, at times were heard
Mysterious sounds, that, like the winged air,
Arrived, and went, none knowing whence or where;
Portentous, startling 'midst their quiet reign,
The nodding guardians of the wizard chain,
As silence hears the waking lion pour
His stern, low, long, reverberating roar.

Then, rousing Learning from her dead repose,
Another and a nobler Cadmus rose;
Wove the bright spell whence all her glory springs,
And crushed her manacles, and gave her wings.

As earliest sunbeams to the mountains fly,
Saluting first the neighbours of the sky,
On souls that tower o'er earth's contracted span,
The rays of God-head break, that lighten man;
Thus, on high Luther broke the light divine,
While earth in Egypt's darkness lay supine;
(One glorious ray on Huss, on Wickliffe poured,
But clouds had darkened and the tempest roared,)
But now that sacred light resistless came,
Powerful as Pentecost's own hallowed flame,
Beamed through his mind, Rome's secret lusts disclosed,
Her chambers of idolatry exposed;
Bared to his eyes the bonds of fraud and wrong,
By which her blind had led the blind along;
Till, the full radiance hiding from his gaze,
The fires which hell rejoiced on earth to raise,
His bosom labouring 'neath the mighty power,
That form'd his soul for that decisive hour,
In His great name to whom all hearts belong,
Whose ready might can make the feeble strong,
With the full weight of the incumbent God,
Fierce on the papal lion's neck he trod.

As one whom the dark dungeon's walls enclose.
Its foulness sees not, nor its straitness knows,
But light let in, and liberty achieved,
Eyes his vile den and wonders how he lived,
Drinks Nature's beauties in with eager sight,
And roves untired in measureless delight;
So, when the mind first caught the light of truth,
Unsealed her eyes, and mued her mighty youth,
Surprised she saw, and burst, the darksome spell,
That bound her God-like strength in dust to dwell,
And wide o'er Learning's opening kingdoms flew,
Swift as her friendly hand the opposing bound o'erthrew.
There, History stood, and tasked her page to tell,
Earth's changeful pageant, how the mighty fell,
The weak arose:  the Poet poured his lay,
Half mortal, half divine:  in long array
The Sons of Wisdom came, prepared to shew,
All that unaided man of man can know:
And last, Benevolence!  thy book divine,
Rose in bright vision, to exalt, refine;
To light o'er nature's path thy holiest flame,
And shew her energies their destined aim.
And man beheld, as slowly dawned the day,
The mists of error, rising, roll away,
Vast scenes of bliss emerging to his view,
As hope oft dreamed, arid found the vision true,
And stood o'erawed; (so stood the seer of old
Whose heaven-cleared sight o'er beauteous Canaan rolled,)
And though the lovely land was yet to win,
Though hard the strife to rise and enter in;
Still, there he saw his sure' possession lie,
And hailed his birthright with a prophet's eye.

Right onward hence his daring soul hath pressed,
With constant aim that knew nor check nor rest;
Thou, Love!  hast given his noblest passions scope,
Warmed his high zeal, and winged his soaring hope;
Enlarged his heart with truths till then unknown,
Taught him to see thy triumphs were his own;
Towards general good his utmost force to bend,
Thy power the means, thy hallowed reign the end.

No longer now abused, with hoodwinked sight,
Earth's blinded kindreds grope in mental night,
Arts, science, equal laws, in glory stand,
Where'er descend the blessings of thy hand;
But chief thy sacred lore, whose heaven-formed plan,
Above the brutes that perish, raises man.

Thy hand hath spread the love-illumined page.
To form the ductile mind of tender age,
The hope of kingdoms in the moral scale;
(The seed must flourish or the harvest fail)
Saved from the wild untutored youth that came,
To lawless manhood, and an age of shame;
Led by thy kindly precepts to attest,
The social feeling kindling in his breast,
To own his Maker's claims, and feel, and see,
All that immortal man was born to be.

Roused by Thy voice, what crowds conspire to pour,
The words of life on earth's remotest shore;
Blows there a gale that wafts not on its wing,
The vital odours of Judea's Spring?
The rose of Sharon, and the balm that flows,
Where spicy Gilead's fragrant harvest glows,
The fainting nations catch the glad perfume,
And bless the power that lifts them from the tomb.
Thy Sons, a faithful, firm, devoted band,
Have dared the treacherous deep, the hostile land;
Faced the keen rigors of the polar snow;
Panted beneath the sultry tropic's glow;
And raised, where'er their devious course they bore,
Unfading trophies to thy God-like power.

Again voluptuous Corinth's laurel grove,
Hath listened to the voice of sacred love.
Where learning's sages in Athenian bowers,
With bright Aspasia charmed the fleeting hours,
Thy page hath bared beyond the sophist's art,
The dark recesses of the human heart;
The future cleared to man's inquiring gaze,
And rent the veil that wisdom failed to raise.

Even He, the great Stagyrite, skilled to wind
The maze of thought, to span the grasp of mind,
Strained his keen sight to search beyond the grave:
But Bethlehem's star no helpful radiance gave,
And his high spirit aimless longings sent,
But felt that clay was not its element.

Thus too, the just, the pure, the moral sage,
At once the shame and glory of his age,
All human knowledge to his sight revealed,
Here, only here, perceived the truth concealed;
Yet, though perplexed and lost, with fruitless toil,
His spirit struggled in the "mortal coil,"
Well nigh the prophet's sacred course he trod,
And hailed in vision the descending God.

In realms where arts and empire first were born,
The glorious kingdoms of the rising morn,
Where earth, more full, the vital ray receives,
And mightiest life to savage nature gives;
Where error, too, her haughtiest state upholds,
And winds, with sternest might, her venomed folds;
Thy champions, Charity!  with daring hands,
The Cross have reared, and burst her fatal bands.
O'er the far isles on utmost ocean spread,
That lift to southern gales the palmy head;
Where ne'er, beyond the vast antarctic main,
All-grasping commerce tracked her idol, gain;
Where rapine, lust, and murder, stalked erect,
Beneath the noonday beam, unawed, unchecked:
Benevolence thy healing wings have shed
Meekness and peace, and hate and strife have fled;
The painted warrior hastens to forgive,
Blunts the barbed lance, and bids his brother live.
Thy spirit bade the dauntless Queen descend,
Where sulphurous flames their deadly breath expend,
'Midst Pele's fires, their daemon goddess brave
The truth to witness, and her people save
From dire idolatry, the accursed thing;
O 'twere a sight to lure a seraph's wing
To downward flight, though heaven's eternal song,
A moment faltered for his absent tongue.

Blest is the man who heeds thy powerful claim,
Beyond the lure of pleasure, wealth, or fame,
Who frees his soul from earth's inferior bands,
And ventures all to act what Love commands;
Rapt o'er the world's vain noise, he seems to hear,
Heaven's distant music stealing.  on his ear;
Catches the smile which perfect peace supplies,
And wears on earth the earnest of the skies:
O, might he fly, and tread those lovely, plains!
Not yet, not yet, the weight of earth remains.

See, how yon monarch bird, elate and proud,
Unfolds his mighty wings, a living cloud;
Darts his keen glance to those far fields on high,
Devouring distance with his kindling eye;
Plies his strong pinions with unfaltering sweep,
Bathes his broad bosom in the azure deep,
Basks the long noon within the golden glow,
And quaffs the etherial gales where pure they flow;
Yet, feels at last, his failing strength outworn,
And, sinking, seeks that earth he fain would scorn.

To break his sceptre, and his kingdom tear,
From the dark monarch of the troubled air,
Vast the design, and long the strife may be,
To bind his might, and set his captives free;
Yet Love shall conquer, and to boundless sway,
Strong in immortal vigour, win her way;
Her sons shall spread o'er darkened worlds her law,
Though caution paused, and folly when she saw
So few, so friendless, to such labours borne,
Jingled her bells, and laughed their zeal to scorn;
Nor knew the work at his high word was planned,
Who holds the times and seasons in his hand;
And these the men who first their strength arrayed,
Against the mighty in Jehovah's aid.

Read nature's page, behold the trickling rill,
Meander downwards from its native hill;
So small, the thirsting tigress of the wood,
Might swallow, and still thirst, the tiny flood;
It swells, the wandering fountains of the air,
Break, and discharge their watery treasures there;
Earth too her offspring aids, and now it braves
All opposition, and the whirling waves
Cleave out an ample channel, and defy
Behemoth's caverned gorge to drink it dry;
Thence to the deep, with sweeping course addrest,
A nation's bulwarks heaving on its breast,
Down through the gulphy main its billows pour,
Scorning the check, till, with tumultuous roar
Against the footstool of his throne they beat,
And shake old Ocean on his rock-bound seat.

O Ye too nicely wise!  who take your stand,
On airy heights, above the just command,
Of reason's sober power, and weave in vain,
Fantastic visions of the erring brain;
Say ye, that Self Benevolence inspires?
That earth's low fuel feeds her sacred fires?
The coal from His high altar touched her breast,
Which once His prophet's flaming tongue confest;
E'en you He blesses; not because He must,
Is He then selfish?  or are ye unjust?
The path He shews, enough that man succeeds,
(At awful distance) where his Maker leads;
But think not ye to scorn his humble aim,
Or brand Benevolence with causeless shame;
While here below, though not untouched of ill,
Yet pure and holy is her nature still;
Still, as of old, in Eden's balmy groves,
Crowned with immortal amaranth she roves,
And the chill blasts that made the world a wild,
Have dimmed her coronet; but not defiled.

Lowly herself, the lowly claim her care,
Yon peasant, guider of the pointed share,
His path, though genius shun, nor lore beguile,
Nor riches smooth, is happy in her smile;
His daily want his bounded wishes fills,
His mind contracted as the field he tills;
In narrow space his earthly pleasures roll.
But upward, upward, tends his soaring soul,
With heavenward aim, which though from earth it rise,
Mounts like the patriarch's ladder to the skies;
Like him, perchance, his inward eyes behold,
Those shadowy forms of bright celestial mould,
Creatures of fairer worlds, that downward stray,
And tempt the ravished sight from earth away,
Even to the etherial gates of bliss, and there,
Lost in congenial glories, melt in air.

Raised by her gentle hand the burdened slave,
Toils cheerful on, nor seeks a hopeless grave;
No longer now his time-worn spirit thrills,
At dreams of heaven behind the cloud-capt hills,
Far o'er this dim sublunar sphere it soars,
And when his last sad earth-born tear he pours,
And rises to a happier home on high,
Than Niger's banks or Congo's groves supply,
Shall deem the splendour of that heavenly state,
More splendid from the shame endured so late;
And think for ever on his loosened chain,
With rapture heightened by remembered pain.

To all She speaks, and now the gladdening sound,
Runs the wide circuit of the world around;
First, in the west, her voice was heard on high,
Now from the east the doubling echoes fly;
Deep in the frozen north the accents rise,
With answering shouts the utmost south replies;
Soon round her throne the crowding tribes shall meet,
And earth's rich crown be offered at her feet.

Though thus, Benevolence, thy triumphs spread,
And countless blessings gather round thy head,
Yet have thy laws perverted, formed a veil,
For deeds that turn the cheek of nature pale;
The stern oppressor, self-deceived, and lulled
Accusing conscience, in thy name hath culled,
The deadliest arms that bigot rage could find,
To scatter plagues and ruin 'midst mankind.
Oft has the treacherous tyrant called on thee,
When, couching for the spring, he lacked a plea;
Hailed thee, kind sweetener of life's bitter cup,
And filled the draught with racking poisons up.

So mighty Charles, whose breast to serve thee burned,
His gaze upon the pagan Saxon turned,
In meek accordance with his gentle faith,
Plucked his persuasive weapon from the sheath,
To save the race he deemed his Maker's foe,
While covert lust of empire edged the blow;
And wasted realms and bleeding man deplored,
The loving ravage of the Christian sword.

So, fell Pizarro, o'er the western main,
Led the dark bigots of rapacious Spain;
While Love's blest sign with outstretch'd hands they bore,
"Gold's sacred hunger" bathed their steps in gore;
Till reeked with native blood vast Quito's plain,
And strong La Plata laboured with the slain.

But chief, to shew with what consummate rule,
The audacious fiend, that cozened Eve, can fool
Her hapless offspring; to what lengths of ill,
He bends besotted man to work his will,
His black tribunal rose; with ceaseless care,
His chosen priesthood urge his interest there
There hath he seen them, with derisive laugh,
For ages outrage earth in heaven's behalf,
Insulting God and man, with wheel and flame,
Torment and murder, in Love's holy name;
And load their spotted souls with crime, to buy
His keen contempt, his direst mockery.

Sweet Charity!  if e'er a frown could throw,
Its darkening shadow o'er thy angel brow,
Well might'st thou feel it gathering there, to see;
The Sons of Belial charge their crimes on thee;
Yea, claim thy honors!  while duration rolls,
Or man survives to feel, their blood-dyed souls,
If aught than hell's first furies can be worse,
Must deeper groan beneath the augmenting curse,
Of earth's successive millions, and endure
Remorse, which thou, e'en thou, would'st shun to cure

Not these the men commissioned to fulfil,
The milder mandates of the Almighty will;
The men of crime and blood, whose fiendish ways,
Blaspheme in action whom in words they praise;
He, Lord of all, o'errules their wrath and pride,
To use in judgment and to cast aside;
Must pale-lipped terror through a nation haste,
And war's swift ruin lay its glory waste,
He calls the man whose lust of rule and fame,
Hath seared his heart, and set his soul on flame;
Or, if his wrath decree a lingering fate,
And inward wounds must waste the wretched state,
He bids the reprobate and scorner stand,
In the high places of the fated land;
But, if to save the nations be his care,
If mercy rule, and Heaven resolve to spare,
The man whose heart He tempers from above,
Who bears, though faint, the impress of His Love,
Raised to the task, His high behest receives,
And His own attribute His end achieves.

Woe to the nations, whose insensate pride,
Casts her soft yoke, her rosy bands aside,
An iron bondage shall their necks enthral,
Wither their growth, and bow them to their fall;
If weak, a greater shall their pride o'erthrow,
If strong, the hand that raised shall lay them low.

This awful truth e'en Solyma hath felt,
Earth's favoured station where the Godhead dwelt,
Whose sons presumptuous, held his goodness light,
And drunk with favour, deemed their bliss their right;
What though He made their potent foes their prey,
And swept the heathen from their onward way!
What though He bade creation's movements pause,
Till nature trembled for her broken laws!
Dreamed they for this, their crimes might render vain
The beauteous order of His moral reign?
Oft as they slighted His benign command,
Broke the dark thunders from His jealous hand;
But, when they scorned Him, stooping to bestow
His Love's best blessings in their richest flow,
Though raised so high by His paternal care,
That none but He who placed, could reach them there,
They fell, enduring from their outraged Lord,
A fate that mercy trembles to record.

So when old earth beheld that day of doom,
That swept her myriads to one weltering tomb;
When ocean, glorying in his new-born might,
Burst from his black abysses into light,
O'er man and all his works remorseless driven,
O'erwhelming, crushing, while the lurid heaven,
Heavy with vengeance, closing o'er the scene,
Scarce left a space for breathing life between;
Onward, still onward, foamed its fierce career,
Till the wild wave was monarch of the sphere,
Nor one proud mountain reared its crest on high,
To baffle justice and insult the sky.

O deem not, Child of Man!  when hard thy lot,
Sweet mercy absent, or thyself forgot;
Her's is the power decreed to shield or strike,
And good and evil work her will alike.
When man's dark foe, his mighty mischief done,
Raised his proud ensign o'er the world he won,
Fixed firm on groaning earth his horrid throne,
And deemed mankind and nature all his own;
Let loose the furious elemental war,
To shake creation, and its beauty mar;
And dealt his poisoned arrows far and wide,
Goading the hardened heart to hate and pride;
That awful Power who first his pride subdued,
Curbed not his rage, but bade it tend, to good;
The tempest's fiery breath, the wintry rain,
That pours in deluge on the ravaged plain,
To clear the infected ether, and prepare
Earth's stubborn texture for the tiller's care;
In wisdom, broke not with preventive blow,
In the dark archer's grasp the deadly bow;
But, while the unerring weapons cleave the sky,
Strikes from the points their venom as they fly;
Bids them, though still the wounded breast they tear,
To thrill with saving smart, and temper there,
The softened heart; the only soil below, 
Where Love, fail' plant of heaven, again could grow.
Though 'gainst our peace infernal, malice fought,
Good out of evil thus His purpose wrought;
Though strong our foe, yet stronger far the friend,
Who swayed his hate, who forced his power to bend,
From its own rage its suffering prey to save,
And heal the nations by the wounds it gave.

Yet here, perchance, the bosom still must bleed,
But not for ever, Love disclaims the deed:
Thou widowed fair one!  from whose gentle side,
Thy life's best stay was struck in manhood's pride;
Whose wounded spirit of that treasure 'reft,
In reckless anguish heeds not what is left;
The light-winged loves that graced thy path before,
Have flown for ever to their native shore;
Or, but returning with the dreams of night,
Glance in brief radiance o'er thy mental sight;
As stars in day's broad light no longer seen,
Appear when darkness casts her veil between;
Yet are thy griefs, thy sufferings, not unknown,
Nor thou, sweet mourner, friendless, though alone;
And, as yon flower, though bright its form expand,
That shrinks as withering from thy tender hand,
Thy touch removed, will soon its leaves display,
And laugh once more beneath the eye of day;
So, though thy joys have drooped the languid head,
And hope's bright eye be dim, they are not dead;
Let not the vision from thy soul depart,
Cling to their relics, warm them in thy heart;
Though swept by time's rude breath as though in vain,
Their beauty ripened, they shall spring again;
In Love's fair world shall chance and change defy,
And bloom and flourish in a kinder sky.

My gentle Boy!  whose light just seen to shine,
Above time's dim horizon and decline,
Left our sad eyes with sudden night opprest,
Ere noon had brightened, or its promise blest,
'Twas Love that called thee, at one easy stroke,
The fleshly chains that held thy spirit broke,
Made but one cloud thy sunny morn o'ercast,
And the first foe that crossed thy path the last.
Why, loved one, for so brief a space appear?
Why, from thy home of safety, venture here?
O didst thou stoop around our hearts to cast,
Those bonds that hold our kindred natures fast;
And fly to lead us on the upward road,
And lure our spirits to thy bright abode?
Did god-like goodness send thee from the skies,
In thy brief course to snatch the noblest prize,
That heaven can offer; from our world to bring,
A brother's interest in the Saviour King,
And doubly dear, a kindlier love return,
Than that with which the unbought Seraphs burn!

'Tis well, we weep; but not, blest child, for thee,
The tree of life, instinct with Deity,
Yields thee its fruits; the ever-living springs,
Gush in glad murmurs round thee; thy bright wings
Fan the light gales of Eden; Love and peace,
(Still found together), yield their full increase,
In that congenial climate; yet we shed,
Our needless sorrows o'er thy earthy bed,
But call thee not again!  nor shun to buy,
Thy endless joy with our brief agony;
Yet have we mortal feelings, can we share
Thy heaven-born ardors till we meet thee there!
Young denizen of heaven, O couldst thou come,
Once, but one moment, to thy earthly home,
To say, thou knewest our love, thou feel'st it yet,
And wilt remember, even should we forget;
To tell us all, thyself, thy glory shew;
Thou could'st not tell, nor could we bear to know:
Count, then, our onward footsteps as we pass,
Note every falling sand that leaves our glass;
Watch o'er our failing hearts at life's decline,
Tend our last struggle, as we tended thine;
Mark our freed spirits, as they homeward soar,
And first receive us where we die no more:
Then shall we see, then know, then face to face,
Again shall fold thee in the strict embrace;
Hear from thy lips of music, how thy care,
Perchance hath saved us from the lurking snare,
Forced man's dark foes before thy light to flee,
And far o'erpaid our humble cares for thee:
Then shall those founts of Love which heaven's own power,
Ope'd in our bosoms at thy natal hour,
Blend their rich stores with thine, and flow in one
Commingling tide, through endless ages on.

And can it be!  did truth the law supply,
Or error's subtle workings forge the lie,
That dooms the etherial spirit to sustain,
The body's bondage till it rise again?
Eternal truth!  whate'er thy voice hath taught,
Beyond the soarings of our mortal thought,
Ennobles man; while error, low and base,
Would shame his nature, and his name disgrace:
Here then, we trace her impress, is it fit,
Can heaven-taught man believe, or God permit,
That the high spirits of the great and wise,
That sought, through life, communion with the skies,
And o'er the world with upward aspect trod,
Should sleep for ages with the valley's clod!
What, though the sordid sceptic sunk to clay,
And dozed the midnight of the tomb away,
(Within that narrow cell not more confined,
Than once in pride's thick veil his darkened mind)
More envied he, than when in folly's maze,
Alternate doubt and license ruled his days;
Nor in his fate abhorred, could Adam's race,
Danger or doubt for man's high interests trace:
No moral links in wild confusion thrown,
No blank throughout creation's limits known;
Who lived and died, of God, nor man the friend,
As well in dust fulfils his destined end.

But shall the aspiring spirit of the just,
Levelled with earth-born reptiles, sink in dust?
No, He who first his wondrous frame displayed,
Who breathed His spirit in the form He made,
And bade each working of its nature tend,
Towards universal good, its sacred end;
Forbids his soul to share that sordid state,
Or lose one moment of so bright a date.

Oft must his heart its cherished wish forego;
Oft on a thankless race its cares bestow;
Oft are his actions hid from mortal view;
But He who prompted shall record them too;
Oft must his labours meet the scoffer's eye,
Who deems their aim shall fail, their memory die;
So die, the tyrant hopes, his deeds of wrong,
By the full tide of ages borne along,
To dark oblivion's shoreless, voiceless, deep,
Where even time's troubled waves forget their roar, and sleep.
But vain the tyrant's hope, the scoffer's doubt:
When at the thunder of the Archangel shout,
From death's dark holds through earth and ocean spread
Throng the full myriads of the numbered dead,
To bide the summons; at that call sublime,
Back, back, shall flow the astonished tide of time;
Age after age in long succession rolled,
Shall all its once mysterious depths unfold,
And the dark scenes of each re-passing day,
Bear the broad blaze of heaven's unclouded ray.

Then, each high deed Benevolence hath planned,
Thoughts of her heart, and labours of her hand,
Each good she sought, each ill she taught to shun,
Each trophy that on earth for heaven she won,
Seen and confessed, in deathless hues arrayed,
Stamped on immortal memories, ne'er shall fade.

Sons of the morning, Angels!  to whose care,
Heaven renders man, its future glory's heir,
How joy ye, when his frailer nature shews,
The holier fire that in your bosoms glows.
From worlds where grief has never stained the soil,
Nor the old serpent wound his poisonous coil,
Gladly ye light, where torn with pains and fears,
Toil the sad children of the vale of tears:
The only spot, perchance, your love can find,
To raise the fallen, the broken heart to bind,
And feel that bliss, which in transporting flood,
Must thrill blest natures in diffusing good.
Whether, with nought to you concealed or dark,
Ye range your Maker's boundless reign, to mark
The Comet's rush down heaven's unfathomed steep,
To search the gloomy chambers of the deep,
To ride the lightning's wing, or reach afar,
The rising glories of some new-born star,
Brighter from darkness; whose young splendors trace,
Another living smile o'er chaos gloomy face;
Or rapt through space, where countless worlds of light,
In mazy order moving, charm your sight,
Majestic orbs!  that hailed their natal morn,
Unnumbered ages ere grey time was born;
There 'midst the extatic music of the spheres,
The plaint of mortal woe could reach your ears;
The voice of Love within could turn your eye,
To this poor planet of a younger sky.

How stooped your flashing pinions, nor delayed.
Lighting the shaggy desert's tangled shade,
When Hagar mourned, to point the streamlet near,
Whose silent lapse escaped her anxious ear,
When faint and prostrate on the dreary way,
Ishmael, the germ of future nations, lay.

Swept not the winged steed, the flaming car,
The pomp and terror of Cherubic war,
Around the Prophet's head?  when mortal arms,
Shook his desponding friends with vain alarms,
And heaven's high chivalry descending came,
To shield the holy head, and mar the tyrant's aim.

Yet ne'er before so worthy or so dear,
To heavenly eyes did this low world appear,
As when ye sped to rouse unconscious man,
That night Messiah's earthly course began;
Left the bright precincts of your upper reign,
And raptured hung o'er Bethlehem's peaceful plain:
The sword that smote the dragon cast aside,
Dread war forgot, resigned its dazzling pride;
Your hands but grasped the seraphs' love-tuned lyre,
Your lips responsive owned the sacred fire,
And breathing peace, earth's ravished gales along,
Poured the rich cadence of celestial song;
While loud and far your thrilling chorus ran,
"Glory to God on high, GOOD WILL to Man."

Then thy fair star, Benevolence, that shed,
Its radiance o'er Messiah's lowly bed,
Formed and commissioned for its purpose high,
Sprung from the bosom of infinity;
Paid its descended Lord the homage due,
And veiled its flaming forehead, and withdrew.
Perchance, its mission done, retraced its course,
Merged in the depths of light's eternal source;
Perchance, reserved, when at the Judge's seat
Time and eternity again shall meet,
In milder glory o'er his path to burst,
And grace his second advent as the first;
Ordained to temper with benignant glow,
The frown of justice on that awful brow,
And tell the ransomed bondsmen of the tomb,
Of Love that saved them from a darker gloom;
Perchance, in sight of heaven's adoring powers,
To blaze for ever o'er its topmost towers,
(Where floats the standard of the cross unfurled,)
The badge and trophy of a rescued world.

Say ye, blest tenants of the realms of light!
O, say, doth fancy soar too bold a flight,
When on that sacred eve she deems ye pressed,
From all the circling stations of the blest,
The starry isles of Aether; or perchance,
Joy in your hearts, and pity in your glance,
Swift beyond thought, from far-off worlds ye came,
Where the first flash of this our solar flame
Not yet hath lightened, to announce the grace,
That raised and dignified our ruined race;
And shall not we, escaped the weary strife,
That sickened and debased our mortal life,
From the dull chains of earth and flesh unbound,
Angelic convoys breathing Love around,
Exulting, plume the immortal wing, and trace
This bond of brotherhood through peopled space.

High o'er all height, unbounded, and alone,
The Love that brought, and sent, Messiah down;
The aim and victim in that fearful deed,
Where heaven, and earth, and hell, for once, agreed:
Thought sinks beneath it; Man, what canst thou more,
Than veil thy face in silence, and adore!
Yet, that blest sun that rose on stormy years,
And set on Calvary's mount in blood and tears,
At length shall pour, renewed to brighter birth,
Its weight of glory on rejoicing earth.

Spirit of Him, whose universal reign,
Fixed on thy laws for ever shall remain,
Benevolence!  each pause from ill below,
Each hope of bliss above to thee we owe;
Heaven's primal ray, that forth in beauty broke,
Ere evil was, or slighted justice woke;
And still to be when all things else have past,
Unborn, undying, greatest, first, and last;
He first in power, would all his foes subdue,
By thy mild force, as first in goodness too;
To give Thee scope, He loosed the thousand springs,
Whence burst to being all created things;
Though needing nought Himself, with kind resolve,
Bade worlds unnumbered round His throne revolve,
And Earth, though fallen, within His presence move,
To feel His glory yet, and share His Love.
Though death, unloosed, could ride the winged gale,
Could all the links of wide creation fail,
And ruin boast o'er systems formed in vain,
Not less His bliss, nor circumscribed His reign;
Yet man, vain man, still claims His dearest cares,
Provoked, He blesses, and insulted spares,
And since, alas!  His Love was lost below,
Which man must know on earth, or never know;
And lost had ever been, except His Son,
Messiah, God o'er all, the only one,
That could replant it here, had stooped to save,
And died to seal the gift; that son He gave:
Though righteous judgment urged, its claim withstood
And linked His glory with His creatures' good.

Could mortal power ascend the throne sublime,
Could angel wing its heights of glory climb,
Then, might they wondering see, how perfect Love
Could mightier than Almighty justice prove,
And feel the depth of that unfathomed plan,
That sunk essential Godhead down to man.

High-favoured man!  with thee the Almighty's care,
Hath deigned his best, his noblest wealth to share,
And round thy honoured head the beam hath thrown,
That breaks the brightest from his radiant crown;
Benevolence!  sole attribute that makes,
On earth a stay, that God with men partakes;
Each pure perfection else, to them unknown,
Power, justice, wisdom, His, but His alone;
And finite graces spring beneath the sky,
But born for earth, with earth must fade and die;
Faith, as His gift but points the upward way,
Nor shares His nature, nor directs His sway;
Hope finds no room in His eternal breast,
Of full perfection in Himself possest;
But high Benevolence, adored, endeared,
Wide as His rule is known, His name revered,
Fills in that sacred home the noblest place,
An ocean, boundless as eternal space;
And downward thence that tide of mercy turns,
Whence earth's unfailing fountains fill their urns.

This is the "Law of Love," to mortals known:
The Bow that smiles above the wondrous throne:
The Grace that lifts us to the blest abode;
That joins our nature to the PERFECT GOD.
