Around yon lonely isle, the blue waves roam,
And wildbirds there the evening song renew;
There found the fallen brave a quiet home,
There death his pall around their ashes threw.

No sylvan maids are seen to wander near,
And strew with dewy wreaths that verdant spot,
No weeping mother bends above their bier,
No aged father wails their timeless lot.

How lonely that blooms isle!  the brave, who died,
And in its bosom silently recline,
The elm above them spreads its verdant pride,
And dewy wildflowers o'er their slumbers shine.

Those fallen breasts with honor once beat high,
And throbb'd for death or glory's wreath of light,
They sternly strove, when ruin hover'd nigh,
They shone in battle and they sunk in night.

The pride of beauty, manhood's fervid glow,
The eye of valor and the lips of lore,
Deep in their narrow cave are still and low,
Condemn'd to silence, fall'n to rise no more.

No more for them the rosy morn shall gleam,
No more the wildbirds charms sweet evening's close,
No more shall friendship soothe life's fever'd dream,
No more affection 'lure them to repose.

But oh, tis vain to murmur or bewail,
Dwells ought on earth, that long on earth shall be?
The columns of the world itself shall fail,
Its gorgeousness shall fade, its pomp shall flee.

The soldier's arm and glittering shield of war,
The heart that beats with valor's pulse of fire,
The scythe of death their day of life shall mar,
Their throbs shall languish and their pride expire.

E'en kingly heads shall like the peasant's fall,
And splendor, joy, and princely pomp decay,
The crowning pageantry of life's a pall,
The sun of glory shines but for a day.

That lonely isle holds in its narrow breast
The poor remains of those who fought and fell,
There in each other's cold embrace they rest,
Long shall they slumber in that verdant cell.

Till, when the last great day shall rend the skies,
And call the sleeping from each silent grave,
Yon blooming sods shall from their bosoms rise,
And render up to heaven the slumbering brave.
