On the rich flowrage of a lemon's root,
Parent of silver leaf and golden fruit,
O'erhung by roses and laburnums bays,
Sakmet and Zingi tun'd their rural lays&mdash;
Sooth'd by the song the frolic finch forgot
The silver couplets of her pendant cot,
And from her pastime in the distant trees
Flew to the reed that vocalized the breeze;
Sooth'd by the song the perch on sunny oar
Moved through the flow'rs that flounc'd the painted shore,
The dappled panther fled the hollow tree,
To lull his head upon the shepherd's knee:
The lion came, rude monarch of the wild
By music from his savage mood beguil'd,
The fawn he wooed, the lambkin he caress'd,
Lick'd the swain's hand and fawn'd upon his breast.

Sakmet and Zingi hasten'd to rehearse
Their bosoms tenants in alternate verse,
Caza was Sakmet's, Zelma Zingi's pride,
Thus Sakmet spoke, and Zingi thus replied:

SAKMET.
First time my eyes were blessed with Caza's form,
I met her mourning in a savage storm,
I gently asked the cause that made her weep,
The nymph replied, she'd lost her snowy sheep;
Together hied we thro' the verdant grove,
While mutual glances spoke a mutual love;
I found the wanton lamb &mdash; ah, silly part
To find the lambkin where I lost my heart:&mdash;
Fatigued, we sought a quiet resting spot,
Nor sought it long, before a mossy grot,
Rude chamber of the silver dappled kid,
Whose feet in flow'rs, whose head in vines was hid,
Whose front in tufts, whose sides in shrubbing boss,
Laugh'd from his fragrant robes of golden moss.
There as we pass'd the gate of tangled vine.
I kiss'd her hand &mdash; she vow'd her heart was mine;
I for her hair &mdash; dishevelled and untress'd,
Whose looks glanced gold upon her iv'ry breast,
Nip'd the first buds the flowriest hillocks yield,
And rifled all the roses of the field;
And for her neck, o'erhung with silken hair,
(For scarfless bloomed her neck, and bosom fair;)
I cropt the tulip in its crimson prime,
The blosoming bean and golden-fruited lime,
The rose and jas'mine chain'd in flowry links,
And olives blooming 'tween alternate pinks:
These in the valley's mossy grot I found
And press'd her forehead while I wreathed them round,
Then as enchanted o'er her charms I hung,
I strove in vain to give my feelings tongue,
Till sweetly phrenzied thrill'd with rapturous bliss,
I made my glowing orator a kiss.

ZINGI.
A woodland mosque beyond yon distant height,
First charmed my eyes with lovely Zelma's sight,
There by devotion was my bosom led,
To sue for heaven thro' mighty Mahummed;
She caught my view &mdash; my view forgot the shrine,
For she most seemed of origin divine;
And my wild glance beheld with rapture warm,
And drank loves phrenzy from her seraph form;
From her dark ringlets flowing down her back,
From her voluptuous eyes of sparkling black.
From her fine lips where purest sweets repose,
Like day's last glance upon the full blown rose,
And more than all the rest, from the rich soul
That with mild glory lightened up the whole:&mdash;
On graceful foot I saw her quit the mosque,
And swiftly dance along the flow'ry bosk,
I left the mosque her holiest guest to see,
(Where Zelma was, was still a mosque to me,)
Unseen I trac'd her footsteps to a fount,
Whose limpid waters issued from the mount,
And on whose brink o'erhung with yellow broom,
Arose soft tufted crests of shrubby bloom;&mdash;
Here let young fancy's eye of lightning rest
To view an angel in my passions guest,
And in the bell-bank'd fountain to behold
A polished looking glass in frame of gold.
She doff'd the Caftan and the scarf to lave,
Her mellow beauties in the diamond wave:
O sacrilege to view that holy form,
By virtue cold, by ripen'd vigour warm;
The sanctu'ry of Venus to profane,
Love closed my eyes, but passion oped again;
Startled by envious rustling on the ground,
She flung a swift and flutter'd glance around;
Just then a tiger in his dreadful pride,
Came rushing down the mountain's bosky side,
Leap'd o'er the stream and springing thro' the grove,
Pursued the footsteps of my fainting love;
I flew the gory savage to oppose,
And on my breast to plant my lovely rose;
Screaming she rushed exhausted by the chase,
And met, unconsciously, my fond embrace.

Then in my arms the fainted maid I bore
With trembling transports to the pebbled shore,
Where summon'd by the stream and breezy sky,
The vital beam soon kindled in her eye,
She kiss'd my hand and press'd it to her cheek,
Then said, I feel what angels cannot speak,
I deem you love, and if my bosom be
Worth the receipt, I pledge it here to thee.

SAKMET.
The balm of autumn recommends the breeze,
Sweet flow'rs the ground, and sunny fruit the trees;
The shining rills adorn the verdant scene,
Like silver ribbands on a robe of green,
Palm decks the hill, the vine the mossy wall,
The sun the east, but Caza decks them all;
Where'er she smiles for me blue violets grow,
White lilies bend and purpling roses blow;
O'er merry beds Bassora's fountains roll,
Health fills my frame, and rapture fills my soul.

ZINGI.
The am'rous ring-dove loves her downy nest,
The exhausted lion loves his balmy rest,
The graceful wild steed loves the desert glade,
The overheated lambkins love the shade,
The towring eagle loves the mountain tree,
O Zelma, Zelma, Zingi loves but thee.

SAKMET.
Caza, I hold thee thus, that with thy lore,
To me the barren wild should seem a grove,
Without thee, Earth's most blooming bow'r should be
A desert and a wilderness to me.

ZINGI.
Zelma, I hold thee thus, my darling maid,
Should death entomb thee near the willows shade,
I'd fix my home upon thy tearful clay,
Sigh out my heart and weep my soul away;
Then swiftly fly to seek thy lovely ghost,
To heavens rich bowers or Hades' sable coast;
On either realm with thee in bliss I'd dwell,
Without thee, Zelma, heaven to me were hell.

SAKMET.
Where silken tendrils round the palm tree twine
The velvet curtains of the branching vine,
Where the charm'd eyes a laughing grove behold, 
Whose mellow peaches ripen into gold,
There where two cots of flow'ry carpets rest,
Dwells the fair tenant of my love warm breast.

ZINGI.
Where you tall pine is wreathed with half blown rose,
And dappled lemons starred with golden o's
Spurn the gay dell and steal into the skies,
The vine-clad walls of beauteous Zelma rise.

The shepherd ceased to swell the ringing reed,
For dewy sparkles lit the evening meed;
When from the covert of a pleasant vine,
Whose pregnant clusters teem'd with mellow wine,
Sprang with a love-laugh that enrich'd their charms,
Zelma and Caza to their shepherds arms.
