Led by the star of evening's guiding fires,
That shone serene on Aden's lofty spires,
Young Agib trod the solitary plain,
Where groves of spikenard greet his sense in vain:
In wealth o'er all the neighbouring swains supreme,
For manly beauty ev'ry virgin's theme;
But no repose his anxious bosom found,
Where sorrow cherish'd an eternal wound.
The frequent sigh, wan look, and frantic start,
Spoke the despair that prey'd upon his heart.
The haunts of men no more his steps invite,
Nor India's treasures give his soul delight.
In fields and deep'ning shades he sought relief,
And thus discharg'd the torrent of his grief.

"Ye swains, that thro' the bow'rs of pleasure rove,
Ye nymphs, that range the myrtle glades of love,
Forgive a wretch, whose feet your bow'rs prophane,
Where joy alone and happy lovers reign:
But oh!  this breast incessant cares corrode,
And urge my fainting steps to death's abode!
Joyless to me the seasons roll away,
&mdash;Exhausted nature hurries to decay;
Day's chearful beams for me in vain return,
For me the stars of heav'n neglected burn:
In vain the flow'rs in wild luxuriance glow;
In vain the harvest groans, the vintage bleeds,
Grief urges grief, and toil to toil succeeds:
Since she whose presence bade the world be gay,
Whose charms gave lustre to the brightest day,
HINDA, once fairest of the virgin train,
Who haunt the forest, or who range the plain,
Sleeps where the boughs of yon black cypress wave,
And I am left to languish at her grave!

"To that dear spot, when day's declining beam
Darts from yon shining towers a farewell gleam,
Constant as eve, my sorrows I renew,
And mix my tears with the descending dew,
The last sad debt to buried beauty pay,
Kiss the cold shrine, and clasp the mould'ring clay.

"Far other sounds this conscious valley heard,
Far other vows these ardent lips preferr'd,
When sick with love, and eager to embrace
Beauties unrivall'd but by angel grace,
I madden'd as I gaz'd o'er all her charms,
And hail'd my HINDA to a bridegroom's arms.
I printed on her lips an hasty kiss,
The pledge of ardent love and future bliss;
Her glowing blushes fann'd the secret fire,
Gave life to love, and vigour to desire;
Then, when the tear, warm trickling down my cheek,
Spoke the full language passion could not speak,
Our mutual transport seal'd the nuptial rite,
Heav'n witness'd, and approv'd the chaste delight&mdash;

"'Prepare, I cried, prepare the nuptial feast,
Bring all the treasures of the rifled East:
The choicest gifts of ev'ry clime explore,
Let Aden yield her tributary store;
Let Saba all her beds of spice unfold,
And Samarcand send gems, and India gold,
To deck a banquet worthy of the bride,
Where mirth shall be the guest, and love preside.

"'Full fifty steeds I boast of swiftest pace,
Fierce in the fight, and foremost in the race.
Slaves too I have, a numerous, faithful band,
And heav'n hath giv'n me wealth with lavish hand:
Yet never have I heap'd an useless store,
Nor spurn'd the needy pilgrim from my door;
And, skill'd alike to wield the crook or sword,
I scorn the mandate of the proudest lord.
O'er my wide vales a thousand camels bound,
A thousand sheep my fertile hills surround;
For her amidst the spicy shrubs they feed,
For her the choicest of the flock shall bleed:
Of polish'd chrystal shall a goblet shine,
The surface mantling with the richest wine;
And on its sides with Omman's pearls inlaid,
Full many a tale of love shall be portray'd:
Hesper shall rise and warn us to be gone,
Yet will we revel 'till the breaking dawn;
Nor will we heed the morn's unwelcome light,
Nor our joys finish with returning night.

"'Not Georgia's nymphs can with my love compare,
Like jet, the ringlets of her musky hair:
Her stature like the palm, her shape the pine,
Her breasts like swelling clusters of the vine;
Fragrant her breath as Hadramut's perfume,
And her cheeks shame the damask rose's bloom.
Black, soft, and full, her eyes serenely roll,
And seem the liquid mansion of her soul.
Who shall describe her lips, whose rubies glow,
Her teeth like shining drops of purest snow?
Beneath her honey'd tongue persuasion lies,
And her voice breathes the strains of Paradise.

"'A bower I have, where branching almonds spread,
Where all the seasons all their bounties shed;
The gales of life amidst the branches play,
And music bursts from ev'ry vocal spray,
Its verdant foot a stream of amber laves,
And o'er it Love his guardian banner waves:
There shall our days, our nights in pleasure glide,
Friendship shall live when our passion's joys subside;
Increasing years improve our mutual truth,
And age give sanction to the choice of youth.'

"Thus fondly I of fancied raptures sung,
And with my song the gladden'd valley rung.
But fate, with jealous eye, beheld our joy,
Smil'd to deceive, and flatter'd to destroy;
Swift as the shades on night the vision fled,
Grief was the guest, and death the banquet spread.
A burning fever on her vitals prey'd,
Defied Love's efforts, baffled med'cine's aid,
And from these widow'd arms a treasure tore,
Beyond the price of empires to restore.

"What have I lost, what portion but despair,
Long days of woe, and nights of endless care?
While others live to love, I live to weep;
Will sorrow burst the grave's eternal sleep?
Will all my pray'rs the savage tyrant move
To quit his prey, and give me back my love?
If far, far hence, I take my hasty flight,
Seek other haunts, and scenes of soft delight,
Amidst the crouded mart her voice I hear,
And shed, unseen, the solitary tear;
Music exalts her animating strain,
And beauty rolls her radiant eye in vain:
All that was music fled with Hinda's breath,
And beauty's brightest eyes are clos'd in death!
I pine in darkness for the solar rays,
Yet loath the sun, and sicken at his blaze;
Then curse the light, and curse the lonely gloom,
While unremitting sorrow points the tomb.

"Oh!  Hinda, brightest of the black-ey'd maids,
That sport in paradise' embow'ring shades,
From golden boughs where bend  ambrosial fruits,
And fragrant waters wash th' immortal roots;
Oh from the bright abodes of purer day,
The prostrate Agib at thy tomb survey;
Behold me with unceasing vigils pine,
My youthful vigour waste with swift decline;
My hollow eye behold, and faded face,
Where health but lately spread her ruddy grace&mdash;
I can no more &mdash; this sabre sets me free;
This gives me back to rapture, love and thee.
Firm to the stroke its shining edge I bare,
The lover's last sad solace in despair.
Go, faithless steel, act ling'ring nature's part,
Bury thy blushing point within my heart;
Drink all the life that warms these drooping veins,
And banish at one stroke a thousand pains.
Haste thee, dear charmer; catch my gasping breath,
And chear with smiles the barren glooms of death!
'Tis done &mdash; the gates of Paradise expand&mdash;
Attendant Houri seize my trembling hand&mdash;
I pass the dark, inhospitable shore,
And, Hinda, thou art mine &mdash; to part no more."
