Among the mighty works of God appear,
Objects and scenes so beautiful and grand,
In order placed, or moving in their sphere,
Upheld and guided by his powerful hand,
That the rapt soul of man can only stand,
And swell with wonder, gratitude, and praise;
And long &mdash; intensely long, that he who planned,
And guides them still in their mysterious ways,
Might stamp eternity forever on their face.

Ye orbs of light!  your Maker's hand has placed,
To roll and shine in ether's boundless plain;
Shall the heavens pass, your radiance be effaced,
And nothing but one boundless blot remain?
Ye seasons!  as ye course and course again,
Your happy circuit, what can reconcile,
To the dark thought, that all your beauteous train
Shall cease?  ah!  nothing but this hope; &mdash; erewhile,
New heavens and earth shall rise, in brighter forms to smile.

There's inspiration in the mountain's height,
And holy men, as if by nature taught,
Have made the hills their altars; thence the light
Of law divine, to erring man was brought:
There arks have rested &mdash; promised lands been sought,
And freedom's cradle rock'd by mountain blast;
I've breathed your freshness, and your spirit caught:
I've gazed with rapture on your prospect vast,
And bless'd the hand of him, who bade your feet stand fast.

And yet the milder features of the earth,
Can touch the soul; e'en tho' the fertile plain,
To luxury's debasing joys gave birth,
Degraded man, and formed the slave's first chain:
For there refinement leads her smiling train;
There rise the mightiest prodigies of mind&mdash;
There noblest arts have held their happy reign,
And human life is softened and refined;
Bloom on ye fertile vales, blest nurseries of our kind.

I've look'd upon the ocean's broad expanse,
And felt my soul dilating with the sight,
In painful haste; as when our eyes advance,
In quick transition, on time blaze of light.
I've heard your voice proclaim the Maker's might;
I've seen your war of winds &mdash; your waves that leap&mdash;
Your sporting monsters &mdash; not without delight;
I've seen the nations o'er your pathway sweep,
And heat their stores of wealth, and knowledge o'er the deep.

And there are works that human minds devise,
And human hands achieve, beneath heaven's care;
And there are social forms and social ties,
And social virtues, all so wondrous fair:
And scenes of life, where God has poured a share
Of his celestial wisdom on the soul;
And groups of lofty men, whose spirits dare,
Suffer and do at duty's stern controul,
And in the immortal race, press onward to the goal.

Some passages of life there are, so sweet,
That nought but heaven can emulate their worth;
Such is the peaceful home, where virtues meet,
And circle round the altar and the hearth.
Parental love from thence derived its birth,
And filial piety, fraternal care,
And all the tenderest charities of earth;
Who that has seen, has not conceived the prayer&mdash;
Let not the fill destroyer ever enter there.

The unstained judgment seat, the spotless hand
Of the firm judge, no bribe could e'er allure;
The venerable hall, where sages stand,
In counsel wise, in fear of heaven pure.
To plead the rights of man, or fix secure,
The righteous laws, those guardians of our race:
I've traced these steps of justice, bold and sure,
And worshipped in her temple's holy place:
Rejoice beneath her feet, O earth, retain their trace!

A sacred light from patriot arms has gleamed,
When noble breasts have formed their country's wall;
And sacred blood from patriot veins has streamed,
And more than earthly glory circled all.
And I have mused, and felt the thought appal
My sickening soul: &mdash; such glory shall be lost,
Such strength and majesty in death must fall;&mdash;
I've mused and wept &mdash;&nbsp;and richer tears can boast,
Than the proud Persian shed, o'er his invading host.

The thronging city has her winning charms,
Her walls, her palaces, her treasured stores,
Her excellence in arts, her strength in arms,
Her peaceful homes, her hospitable doors:&mdash;
The tide of precious knowledge, that she pours,
Through the earth's vein's; &mdash; who, with prophetic eye,
Can see her future desolated shores,
Her glory all, like ruined Babel lie,
And yet withhold the tear &mdash; and yet repress the sigh?

A sweet, a sacred awe steals o'er the soul,
Within the solemn temple. &mdash; mind meets mind,
And prayerful thoughts, like mingled incense roll,
Their savours upward, and their answers find.
And when to meditation well inclined,
No earthly scene, so much my soul can move;
In agony of thought, our Maker kind,
Have I besought, to spare this scene of love;
To spare this heaven below, 'till heaven begin above.
