O ye Nymphes most fine who resort to this brooke,
For to bathe there your pretty breasts at all times:
Leave the watrish bowres, hyther and to me come
at my request nowe.

And ye Virgins trymme who resort to Parnass,
Whence the learned well Helicon beginneth:
Helpe to blase her worthy deserts, that all els
mounteth above farre.

Nowe the silver songes of Eliza sing yee,
Princely wight whose peere not among the virgins
Can be found:  that long she may remaine among us,
now let us all pray.

For Syrinx daughter she is, of her begotten
Of the great God Pan, thus of heaven aryseth
All her exlent race:  any mortall harde happe
cannot aproche her.

See, she sittes most seemely in a grassy greene plott,
Clothed in weedes meete for a princely mayden,
Boste with Ermines white, in a goodly scarlett
bravely beseeming.

Decked is that crowne that upon her head standes
With the red Rose and many Daffadillies;
Bayes, the Primrose and violetts be sette by:  how
joyfull a sight ist.

Say, behold did ye ever her Angelike face,
Like to Phoebe fayre?  or her heavenly havour,
And the princelike grace that in her remaineth?
have yee the like seene?

Medled ist red rose with a white together,
Which in either cheeke do depeinct a trymme cheere,
Her majestie and eye to behold so comely, her
like who remembreth?

Phaebus once peept foorth with a goodly guilt hewe,
For to gaze:  but when he sawe the bright beames
Spread abroade fro' her face with a glorious grace,
it did amaze him.

When another sunne he behelde belowe heere,
Blusht he red for shame, nor againe he durst looke:
Would he durst bright beames of his owne with hers match,
for to be vanquisht.

Shew thy selfe now Cynthia with thy cleere rayes,
And behold her:  never abasht be thou so:
When she spreades those beames of her heavenly beauty, how
thou art in a dump dasht?

But I will take heede that I match not her grace
With the Laton seede, Niobe that once did,
Nowe she doth therefore in a stone repent:  to all
other a warning.

Pan he may well boaste that he did begit her,
Such a noble wight; to Syrinx is it joy
That she found such lott with a bellibone trym
for to be loaden.

When my younglinges first to the dammes doo bleat out,
Shall a milke white Lambe to my Lady be offred:
For my Goddesse shee is, yea I my selfe her Heardgrome
though but a rude Clowne.

Unto that place Caliope dooth high her,
Where my Goddesse shines:  to the same the Muser
After her, with sweete Violines about them
cheerefully tracing.

Is not it Bay braunche that aloft in handes they have,
Evne to give them sure to my Lady Eliza:
O so sweete they play &mdash; and to the same doo sing too
heavnly to heare ist.

See, the Graces trym to the stroake doo foote it,
Deftly dauncing, and meriment doo make them,
Sing to the instruments to rejoyce the more, but
wants not a fourth grace?

Then the daunce wyll be evne, to my Lady therefore
Shalbe gevne that place, for a grace she shall be
For to fill that place, that among them in heavne she
may be received.

Thys bevy of bright Nymphes, whether ist goe they now?
Raunged all thus fine in a rowe together?
They be Ladies all i' the Lake behight soe?
they thether all goe.

One that is there chiefe that among the rest goes,
Called is Chlores of Olyves she bears a
Goodly Crownett, meete for a Prince that in peace
ever abideth.

All ye Sheepheardes maides that about the greene dwell,
Speede ye there to her grace, but among ye take heede
All be Virgins pure that aproche to deck her,
duetie requireth.

When ye shall present ye before her in place,
See ye not your selves doo demeane too rudely:
Bynd the fillets:  and to be fine the waste gyrt
fast with a tawdryne.

Bring the Pinckes therewith many Gelliflowers sweete,
And the Cullambynes:  let us have the Wynesops,
With the Cornation that among the love laddes
wontes to be worne much.

Daffadowndillies all a long the ground strowe,
And the Cowslyppe with a prety paunce let heere lye.
Kyngcuppe, and Lillies so belovde of all men,
And the deluce flowre.
