THENOT, PERIN.

Perin, arreed what new mischance betide,
Hath raft thee of thy wonted meriment?
Faire feeds thy flock this pleasant spring beside,
Nor Love, I ween, hath made thee discontent,
Sild Age and Love, to meet in one, consent.

PERIN.
Ah Thenot, where the Joy of hart doth faire,
What marvaile there, if mirth and musick quaile?
See how the flowrets of the field do spring,
The Purple Rose, the Lilly white as Snow;
With smell and colour for an Harvest King,
May serve to make us yong againe, I trow.
Yet all this pride is quickly laid full low,
Soon as the root is nipt with northerne cold,
What smell, or beauty, can we then behold?

THENOT.
As good not heare, as heard, not understand,
My borrell braines through eld beene all too dull,
Sike mister meaning nill by mee be scand,
All as my Face, so wrinckled is my skull:
Then say me Perin, by thy hope of wull,
And by shine Ewes blown bags and bagpipes sound,
So not one Aneling in thy flock be found,

PERIN.
Ah Thenot, by shine alderliefest Lasse,
Or whatsoever is more deere to thee;
No Bagpipe name, let song and sollace passe,
Death hath undon my flock, my pipe, and meet
Dead is the Sheeps delight, and Shepheards glee,
Broke is my Pipe, and I my selfe forlorne,
My Sheep unfed, their fleeces rent and torne.

THENOT.
I mickle muz'de such uncouth change to see,
My flockes refuz'de to feed, yet hale they weare:
The tender Birds sate drooping on the tree,
The carelesse Lambs went wandring here and there:
My selfe unknowne a part of griefe did beare,
Ne wist I why, yet heavy was my hart,
Untimely Death was cause of all this smart.

Up Perin, up, advaunce thy mournfull layes,
Sound loud thy pipe, but sound in dolefull wise.

PERIN.
Who else, but Thenot, can the Muses raise,
And teach them sing and dance in mournfull guise?
My fingers stiffe, my voice doth hoarsely rise.

THENOT.
Ah, where is Collin, and his passing skill?
For him it sits our sorrow to fulfill.

PERIN.
Tway fore extreames our Collin presse so neere,
(Alas that such extreames should presse him so)
The want of wealth, and losse of Love so deere,
Scarce can he breathe from under heapes of woe,
He that beares heav'n, beares no such weight I trow.

THENOT.
Hath he such skill in making all above,
And hath no skill to get, or Wealth, or Love?

PERIN.
Praise is the greatest prise that Poets gaine,
A simple gaine that feeds them ne're a whit.
The wanton lasse for whom he bare such paine,
Like running water loves to change and flit.
But if thee list to heare a sorry fit,
Which Cuddy could in dolefull verse endite,
Blow thou thy Pipe while I the same recite.

THENOT.
Ginne when thou list, all-be my skill but small,
My forward minde shall make amends for all.

PERIN.
Yee Nimphs that loathe your bodies in this spring:
Your tender bodies white as driven Snow:
Yee Virgins chaste which in this Grove doe sing,
Which neither griefe of Love, nor Death do know:
So may your streames runne cleere for ay,
So may your trees give shade alway.
Depart a space,
And give me place,
To wayle with griefe my restlesse woe alone,
For feare my cries,
Constraine your eyes,
To shed forth teares, and help lament my mone.

And thou, my Muse, that whilome wont to case,
Thy Maisters minde with layes of sweete delight,
Now change those tunes, no joy my hart can please,
Gone is the day, come is the darkesome night,
Our Sunne close hid in cloudes doth lie,
We live indeede, but living, die:
No light we see,
Yet wander wee,
We wander farre and neere without a guide:
And all affray,
We loose our way,
For in this world n'is such a Sunne beside.

Ye Shepheards Boyes that leade your flocks a field,
The whilst your sheepe feede safely round about,
Breake me your Pipes that pleasant sound did yeeld,
Sing now no more the Songs of Collin Clout:
Lament the end of all our joy,
Lament the source of all annoy:
WILLY is dead,
That wont to leade
Our flockes and us in mirth and Shepheards glee:
Wel could he sing,
Wel dance, and spring;
Of all the Shepheards was none such as hee.

How often hath his skill in pleasant Song
Drawn al the water-nimphs from out their bowers?
How have they laine the tender grasse along,
And made him Garlands gay of smelling flowers?
Phoebus himselfe that conquer'd Pan,
Striving with Willy, nothing wan.
Ne thinkes I see,
The time when hee
Pluckt from his golden lockes the Laurell crowne;
And so to raise
Our Willies praise,
Bedeckt his head, and softly set him downe.

The learned Muses flockt to heare his skill,
And quite forgot their water, wood, and mount;
They thought his Songs were done too quickly stil,
Of none but Willies Pipe they made account.
Hee sung; they seemd in joy to flowe:
He ceast; they seemd to weep for woe;
The Rurall rout,
All round about,
Like Bees came swarming thicke, to heare him sing
Ne could they thinke,
On meate or drinke,
While Willies musicke in their eares did ring.

But now (alas) such pleasant mirth is past,
Apollo weepes, the Muses rend their haire.
No joy on earth that any time can last,
See where his breathlesse corps lies on the beare.
That selfe same hand that reft his life,
Hath turned Shepheards peace to strife.
Our joy is fled,
Our life is dead,
Our hope, our help, our glory all is gone:
Our Poets praise,
Our happy dayes,
And nothing left but griefe, to thinke thereon.

What Thames, what Severne, or what westerne Seas,
Shall give me floods of trickling teares to shed?
What comfort can my restlesse griefe appease?
O that mine eies were Fountaines in my head!
Ah Collin!  I lament thy case,
For thee remaines no hope of grace.
The best reliefe,
Of Poets griefe,
Is dead, and wrapt full colde in filthy clay,
And nought remaines,
To ease our paines,
But hope of death, to ridde us hence away.

Phillis, shine is the greatest griefe above the rest:
Where beene thy sweetest Posies feately dight,
Thy Girlonds with a true-loves Knot addrest,
And all that erst, thou Willy, didst behight?
Thy labour all is lost in vaine,
The griefe whereof shall ay remaine.
The Sunne so bright,
That falles to night,
To morrow from the East againe shall rise:
But we decay,
And waste away,
Without returne, alas, thy Willy dies.

See how the drooping Flockes refuse to feede,
The Rivers streame with teares above the bankes,
The Trees do shed their leaves, to waile agreede,
The beasts unfed, go mourning all in rankest
The Sunne denies the Earth his light,
The Spring is kill'd with winters might:
The flowers spill,
The birds are still:
No voyce of joy is heard in any place.
The Meddows greene,
A change have seene,
And Flora hides her pale disfigur'd face.

Watch now, ye shepheards boyes, with waking eie,
And loose your time of sleepe, to learne to sing.
Unhappy skill, what good is got thereby,
But painted Praise that can no profite bring?
If Skill could move the Sisters three,
Our Willy still alive should be.
The woolfe so wood,
Amazed stood,
At found of Willies pipe, and left his pray:
Both Pipe and Skill,
The Sisters spill,
So, worse then any wicked Wolfe are they.

O flatt'ring hope of mortall mens delight,
So faire in outward shew, so foule within!
The deepest streames do flow full calme to sight,
The rav'ning Woolves do jet in Weathers skin;
Wee deem'd our Willy ay should live,
So sweete a sound his Pipe could give:
But cruel death
Hath stopt his breath:
Dumbe lies his Pipe that wont so sweete to sound:
Our flockes lament
His life is spent,
And carelesse wander all the woods around.

Come now, ye shepheards daughters, come no more
To heare the Songs that Cuddy wont to sing:
Hoarse is my Muse, my throate with crying, sore;
These woods with Eccho of my griefe doe ring.
Your Willies life was Cuddies joy,
Your Willies death hath kill'd the Boy:
Broke lies my Pipe,
Till Reedes be ripe
To make a new one, but a worse, I feare:
Save yeere by yeere,
To waile my Deere.
All Pipe and Song I utterly forsweare.

THENOT.
Alacke and welladay may shepheards cry,
Our Willy dead, our Collin killd with care:
Who shall not loathe to live, and long to die?
And will not griefe our little Cuddy spare,
But must he too of sorrow have a share?
Ay, how his ruefull verse hath pricks my hart!
How feelingly hath tree exprest my smart!

PERIN.
Ah Thenot, hadst thou seene his sory looke,
His wringed hands, his eies to heav'n upkest;
His teares, that stream'd like water in the Brooke;
His sighes, that made his Rimes seeme rudely drest,
To teares thou wouldst have melted with the rest.
But hie we homeward, night approcheth neere,
And rainie cloudes in southerne skies appeere.
