Long lives the man, that dyes in lusty yeares,
In actions, that Life, and death dispise:
Alexander the chiefe of Royall Peeres,
(Who won one World, and wisht another rise.
That he too worlds, or one might conquer twise)
In prime of youth, in Envies bane did light:
Yet lives through fame, in spight of every spight.

And what is Life (the Life of flesh and blood)
A moments joie, a blast, a blase, a breath:
A bitter-sweate, that yeldes no savery good,
A certayne cause, that bringes uncertaine death.
A rustie swoorde, closde in a paynted sheath,
Which being drawne to sett the soule at large:
They onely live, whom vertue hath in charge.

Fame is the life, and joy of valient sprites,
Desire whereof, doth drive them on the Pike:
Happe Life, happe death, who first at dangers smites,
In Countrie cause, doth either fortune like.
Death cannot daunt, though death them dead doth strike,
And these be they, that Fame with name doth Crowne:
When shallow Graves the multitude do drowne.

Of such a one, and equall with the beste,
My muse is bounde, the praises to revive:
A Knight he was, that with the formost prease,
Where martiall menne, for highest honor strive:
Within whose breaste, the graces all did hive,
His name (that lives) was Phillip Sidney Knight:
His death blames (not the foe, but) fortunes spight.

Whom to revive, Mars and the Muses meete,
In Armor faire, his hearse, they have arayde:
And on the same, a robe downe to the feete,
About his Healme, a Lawrell wreath is brayde.
And by his Swoord a Silver penne is layd,
And either saide, that he their glory was:
And either sight, to see him vade like Grasse.

But to discribe, this worthis Knight at Lardge,
His Life, his death, his giftes from mothers wombe:
Beseemes the Muse that Homer had in chardge,
Who wrote so well upon Achilles Tombe.
As Alexander wisht, that he were dead:
So Homer liv'd, his victories to spreade.

And for my Muse, (that worst may pay this dewe)
I well may say, the dead she doth adore:
A zeale that thrives, God wot but with a fewe,
Flatry doth live, not at the dead mans dore.
Live-men have eares; when Tombes are deafe and poore,
Yet thus my name, shall with the best remayne:
When such froth vades, like Thunder, smoke and rayne.

Now to this Knight, his house, or Birth to blaze,
May well be spar'e, his praises to procure:
The Ivy bushe, is but a Needles gaze,
To sell the Wine, which of it self is pure.
So sweete a Grape, grewe on no Thorne be sure,
Sidney his sire, and Dudley was his Dame:
Parentes well knowen of Honnor and of fame.

In tender yeres, where one instruction might,
Grafte Lore and Grace:  by which men Honor knowe:
His vertues blasd so cleare in all mennes sight,
As by the same, a number did foreshowe.
What frutes in fine, upon those blomes would growe,
Even these (the best) Love, loyaltie, and Zeale:
To God, to Prince, and to the common weale.

His wisdome shewed, while Learning might engrave,
Within his pliant minde, her sacred beaste:
He bente his eare to heare the Counsells grave,
That science taught, and wrot them in his breaste.
Thus stil with time, his worthines increaste,
His name, his fame, his vertues full of grace:
Was spread, admir'd, and lov'd in every place.

To decke his minde, with Language, and with Lore,
In greenest youth, to travaile he was sett:
By forrayne toyes, he sette but little store,
Sound knowledge was the Marchandize he fette.
And he abroade, such worthy praise did gett,
As Princes when his fame they understoode:
They honor'd him, by all the meanes they could.

The Frenche he sawe, and at their follies smil'de,
He sildome did theire gawdes in garments ware:
In Italy his youth, was not begilde.
By vertue he, their vices did forbeare:
Of this bie-speache he evermore had care,
An English-man that is Italionate:
Doth lightly prove a Devell incarnate.

The Germayne plain, his humor best did please,
They lov'd him much, he honor'd them as farre:
And when the good, he gleaned had from these,
Home he return'd a perfect man, to serve.
His Prince, and Countrey, both in Peace and Warre.
And after him, men Qualited did haste,
And for our good in England he them plaste.

He oft did reade, which well he did regarde,
That prudent Peace, had still to Warre an eye:
And therefore he the souldier good prefarde,
Whose life, himselfe, in Ireland did trye,
Till Essex di'de the flower of Chivallry,
And evermore, the Lawrell with the Launce:
He excerside his Honour to advaunce.

What may be said, to praise this knight to much:
Yea what suffice his vertues to extoll:
In greenest yeares; his gravety was such,
As he was sent in message to Condole,
The Emperours death, which rites he did inruwle,
With much regarde, of that most sollome grace:
As that his name, still liveth in that place.

In Court he liv'de, not like a Carpet knight,
Whose glory is in garments, and his tongue:
If men but knew, the halfe that he did write,
Enough to tyre, a memory so young.
Needes must they say the Muses in him sounge,
His Archadia, unmacht for sweete devise:
Where skill doth judge, is held in Soveraigne price.

What else he wrote, his will was to suppresse,
But yet the darke, a Dyamond cannot drowne:
What be his workes, the finest wittes doe gesse,
The Shepheards notes, that have so sweete a sounde.
With Lawrel bowghes, his healme, long since, have Cround,
And not alone, in Poesie he did passe:
But ev'ry way, a learned Knight he was.

Plesses rare worke, of true Religion,
Confuting those, which no Religion holde:
In vuglar speech, by him was well begonne,
A Learned worke, more pretious farre then Gold.
Worthy his paynes:  and worthie double folde,
If his penne might, the hole with English fitte:
Whose wordes are waid by Judgement, Arte, and witte.

The faulte that makes, the wisest seeme unwise,
A selfe conceite, in wisdome to exceede:
Was farre from him:  the worde in whose devise,
Spero, his hope, did from desire proceede.
Honour to gaine, by many a worthie deede,
On Hope, truth, zeale Learning, and the Launce:
He built his fame and had no foe but Chaunce.

In peace he liv'd, admired of the best,
In peace he liv'd, beloved of the worste:
In peace he liv'd, and never man oppreste,
In peace he liv'd, and ever, with the first.
Layde helpe on those, whom fortune had accurste,
And to be short, the rising sonne he was:
That comforted and shinde in ev'ry place.

But sith Sonne, Mone, and Starres of Heaven must vade,
And all thinges else, the Worlde conteynes belowe:
Man can accompte, his glory but a shade,
His earthly Life, the slaughter of a blowe.
As well appeares, by this our Common woe,
The worthy Knight of whom this good I sing:
Bids sounde the Drome, his sollom knell to ring,

But ere it towles, the sorrowe of his death,
(The griefe of Prince, Peare, and every state)
Let me first showe, the cause, that did unsheath,
His trenching Sword (In peace which shund debate)
Even chiefely this to coole the Spannish hate,
Who arm'de with wroth against this happy Isle:
Our Neighbours burn'de, to make a way for spoyle.

For when we heard the out-cries of the Dutch,
And how their foes, did make their will a lawe:
Theire harmes, that neare, did now our safety tuche,
The Lyon wakte (that keepes the Wolfe in awe,
That never yet did feare the Eagles clawe,)
And mildly first, did Licke the wounded sheepe:
Then sent the Beare, the scattered heard to keepe.

To speake more plaine, though this instruck'ts the wise,
Our Soveraigne Queene, that doth the Lyon beare:
With pittie mov'de, to heare her neighbours cries,
Whom Tyranny, in peeces still did teare.
Shee Lecester sent, to awe that common feare,
And with him went, in this just cause to fight:
A stoute small bande, that many put to flight.

Among the best, and with the first in fielde,
This worthy Knight, inflam'd with countries zeale:
His couradge arm'd, to dye eare he would yeilde,
His Horse and Lawnce, to serve the common weale.
He now preferd, and that a mighty deale.
Before his Landes, his after hope, or Wife:
Yea (Curtius like) more then his proper life.

Of Flushing he, Lord Governour was made,
A charge of truste, which he with truth did keepe:
The bordring foe, did finde he was no shade,
He wakte them oft, when they had lust to sleepe.
And wacht his charge, as shepheards doe their sheepe,
His hede at home, his Arme was in the field:
To garde the frend, and make the foe to yeilde.

He crost the Seaes, not (like to some) for showe,
No waighty cause, could make him leave his charge:
His Parents deathes, and many causes moe,
Were colours just, to set his zeale at large,
Flushing then wailde, to misse her trusty Tardge,
He viv'de her love, and for to do her good,
He vou'de her ayde, and sealde it with his blood.

His loving Wife, then came to houshold there,
The happiest Wife, and now the heaviest wight:
To sir Frauncis Walsingham, she was heyre,
Of goodes, and giftes, beseeming such a Knight.
The droomme now soundes, the worthy men to fight,
A Garrison, his charge, well arm'de to shielde:
He forwith leaves, and posted to the Fielde.

As time, and cause, did will assaile the foe,
Arm'de with the first, still with the last he fought:
Axell he wonne, and eke at Dewsborough,
He well made knowne the vallor of his thought.
At Zutphen last where as his death he cought,
With charge, on charge, and most by men of name:
His death enrowles, a fight of lasting fame.

Which thus fell foorth:  of September now past,
The 22. the foe in armour bright,
Into the Towne, did with some vittaile haste,
And made a bragge, but never ment to fight.
But who can stay the hounde, the Heart in sight,
Or Mars forbid, to venter on the foe:
In open field, that proudly maketh showe.

Caesar alone, on the fierce Neruij ran,
Alexander leap, from a Cittie wall:
And by himselfe, the selfe same Cittie wan,
So we that did, proude Caesar sometime gaule.
Whom no mans power, could ever yet appale:
That day made knowne, the auncient English deede:
Their Vallors left, unto their worthy seede.

A hunting fight, this Skirmidge may be calde,
Of eager Dogges, for as a Leash we see.
A heard of Deare, doe scatter, kill, and gaulde,
Our men but fewe, with furie so did flee.
Upon their foes that some amased be,
Essex that day revi'vde his Fathers name:
Lord Willowbye chardged like a fiery flame.

Worthy Russell that will to no man yeilde,
That day sawe light, even through the hinmost foe:
Stoute Norrys darde, the Spanyard to the fielde,
Parrat stroke downe Gonsago with a blowe.
The yonger North did forward courage showe,
Wingfield did serve like to a hardy knight:
And Wotton preast into the hottest fight.

Fisher, Fortescue, Haydon, Hungate, Veare, Blunt,
Hynd, Hawle, Whetston, Fulford, Udal, Wroughton, Swane
With moe of name the foe did foyle and front,
The smallest feare that day was held a shame.
And sure the foe will quite us of that blame,
Counte Hannyball was left in field for dead:
And Captaine George, Lord Willowby Captive lead.

On foote that day Lord Audely serued well,
Umpton Hatton, as forward as the best:
Standly (now staind) to hard Skirmidge fell,
Cosby deserves, his Honour with the rest.
Thomas was slaine, and Mertayne at that Feaste,
Browne ventured far, and so did many moe:
Unknowne to me, whose fames their names will showe.

But oh to shade, this glory with our woe,
Hardy Sydney, much like to Mars in views,
With furious charge, did breake upon the foe,
A Musket shot, his stately horse then slewe.
He horst againe, the fight did soone renewe.
But fortune, that at his renowne did spight:
A bullet sent, that in his thigh did light.

The wound was deepe, and shivered the bone,
His hart was good, and manly bare this Crosse:
With courage stoute, he did suppresse the mone,
That many made, which did behold his losse.
Udal then lite, softely to leade his Horse,
Let goe quoth he, till I fall to the grounde:
The foe shall misse the glory of my wounde.

Foorth of the fielde, with courage stoute he rode,
To searche his wounde, their skill the Surgions showe:
What might be bought, to do him any good,
What might be wrought, to mitigate his woe,
What might be sought, to salue his mortall blowe,
Was bought, wrought, sought, his wound, his griefe, his life
To cure, ease, save, but (O) the fatall knife,

Had grav'de his wounde, too deepe to drawe long breath,
Had forg'd his griefe, too sharpe to relish ease:
Had thrust his life, into the mouth of death,
What now remaines?  since nothing may appease
The Monster Death, that feedes of his disease,
Even onely this, to shewe his godly end:
For soveraigne praise, did with his life contende.

When death he felt, lay heavie in his wombe,
When life he sawe, made haste from him to flye:
My glory now (quoth he) must be my To'mbe,
In which I coulde, forbeare a while to lye.
Not that I faune on Life, or feare to dye,
But of meere zeale:  if with gods will it stoode:
I respit wish, to doe my Countrey good.

For why as yet, my service is but greene,
My yeres are young, and brought forth Leaves of late:
The blomes were faire, but yet no fruit is seene,
I studied have, to benefit the state.
To execute I am forbid by fate,
My Countreys weale, by me is newe begone:
The hope is lost, my Glasse is broke and ronne.

My Life is now, even at the will of death.
A chaunce not strange, although the chaunge be great:
For he that drawes, his Sworde out of the sheath,
Can hardly say, that he shall scape unbeate:
Unlesse he flye, ere cause doth sound retreat,
The name of Warre is sweete, the praise is fame:
But hazard beares, twixt Life, and death, the game.

And sith my Luck, lightes on the worser Lotte,
In worth I take, what desteny did drawe:
My loving frends, for you I greeve, God wot.
My servaunts true, that held my will for Lawe.
Although my will, thereof still stood in awe,
Your losse is greate, because I lov'd you well:
Receave my love, and so to both farewell.

With that he sight'd their deepe dismay to mind,
And turn'd his head, but left with them his hart:
As he that reads his laste request shall finde,
Brother (quoth he) to you I must imparte.
Three thinges of waight, impresse them in your Harte,
Feare God, and live:  love well my frendes:  and knowe,
That worldly hopes, from vanitie doe flowe.

Wordes like himselfe, the Counsells of a frende,
Which Somary, all wisedome doe containe:
The feare of God is life, that doth not end,
When all thinges faile, the love of frendes remaine.
Yea all thinges else, are pleasure mixt with paine,
Caesar was slaine, and Pompey lost his head:
Their climing thoughts, their owne decaies have bread.

He felt a change, betweene our life, and his,
That mens vaine hopes, so soundly hath discride,
The healthfull talke, but the true feeling misse,
Of heavenly joyes, which in the soule abide.
Flesh like the worlde, and relisheth his pride:
It feares not death, untill it feele the paine,
Who knoweth least, knoweth then this worlde is vaine.

Who did compare, his wound, with patient paine,
Said Marius liv'de, in Sydneys haute desire:
Who saw his death, his life perceaved plaine,
Was wholy bent, by vertue to aspire.
Who heard his wordes, his wisedome did admire,
They were so chard'ge, with grace and grave advise,
As they will live, by usage of the wise.

A smaller wound, leaves many in the fielde,
A greater hurte, his hart could not dismay:
A moneth welny, was spent eare he would yeelde,
Himselfe to death, whom death could not affray.
And when that time, brought on his later day,
Demaund was made:  If hee ne fear'd to dye:
No whit (quoth he,) because I live thereby.

But urged more, then needed in his state,
He gravely did, this perfect answere give:
My death shall (like my life) dissembling hate,
To tell you plaine, to dye I doe not geeeve.
And yet of both, I rather wish to live,
Which who gaynesaies, unwisely spends his breath:
He fayne would live, that most doth prate of death.

The cause is showne, why he desired Life,
For publique good:  but to our common woe:
Our sinnes did drawe, and sharpe the fatall knife,
His vitall threade, to cutte and shread in two.
That his sweete soule, might forth of Prison goe,
Which forthwith flewe, to Abraham his breast,
Where now it raynes, and still shall live in rest.

"Mors honesta, ignominiosa vita preferenda."
