DORON.
Sit downe Carmela here are cubbs for kings,
Slowes blacke as jeat, or like my Christmas shooes,
Sweete Sidar which my leathren bottle brings:
Sit downe Carmela let me kisse thy toes.

CARMELA.
Ah Doron, ah my heart, thou art as white,
As is my mothers Calfe, or brinded Cow,
Thine eyes are like the glowwormes in the night,
Thine haires resemble thickest of the snow,

The lines within thy face are deepe and cleere
Like to the furrowes of my fathers waine,
Thy sweate upon thy face dooth oft appeare
Like to my mothers fat and Kitchin gaine.

Ah leave my toe and kisse my lippes, my love,
My lippes and thine, for I have given them thee:
Within thy cap tis thou shalt weare my glove,
At foote ball sport thou shalt my champion be.

DORON.
Carmela deare, even as the golden ball
That Venus got, such are thy goodly eyes,
When cherries juice is jumbled therewithall,
Thy breath is like the steeme of apple pies.

Thy lippes resemble two Cowcumbers faire,
Thy teeth like to the tuskes of fattest swine,
Thy speach is like the thunder in the aire:
Would God thy toes, thy lips and all were mine.

CARMELA.
Doron, what thing doth moove this wishing griefe.

DORON.
Tis Love Carmela ah tis cruell Love.
That like a slave, and caitiffe villaine thiefe,
Hath cut my throate of joy for thy behove.

CARMELA.
Where was he borne?

DORON.
In faith I know not where.
But I have heard much talking of his dart.
Ay me poore man, with manie a trampling teare,
I feele him wound the forehearse of my heart,

What doo I love?  O no, I doo but talke.
What shall I die for love?  O no, not so.
What am I dead?  O no my tongue dooth walke.
Come kisse Carmela, and confound my woe.

CARMELA.
Even with this kisse, as once my father did,
I seale the sweete indentures of delight:
Before I breake my vowe the Gods forbid,
No not by day, nor yet by darkesome night.

DORON.
Even with this garland made of Holly-hocks
I crosse thy browes from everie shepheerds kisse.
Heigh hoe how glad am I to touch thy lockes,
My frolicke heart even now a free man is,

CARMELA.
I thanke you Doron, and will thinke on you,
I love you Doron, and will winke on you.
I seale your charter pattent with my thummes,
Come kisse and part, for feare my mother comes.
