The silent shade had shadowed every tree,
And Phebus in the west was shrowded lowe:
Ech hive had home her busie laboring Bee,
Ech bird the harbour of the night did knowe.
Even then,
When thus:
All things did from their wearie Labour linne,
Menalcas sate and thought him of his sinne.

His head on hande, his elbowe on his knee,
And teares like dewe be drencht upon his face,
His face as sad as any Swaynes might bee:
His thoughts and dumpes befitting wel the place.
Even then,
When thus:
Menalcas sate in passions all alone,
He sighed then, and thus he gan to mone.

I that fed flockes upon Thessalia plaines,
And bed my lambs to feede on Daffadill,
That lived on milke and curdes poore shepheardes gaines,
And merry sate, and pyp'd upon a pleasant hill.
Even then,
When thus:
I sate secure and fear'd not fortunes ire,
Mine eyes eclipst, fast blinded by desire.

Then loftie thoughts beganne to lift my minde,
I grudgd and thought my fortune was too lowe,
A shepheards life twas base and out of kinde,
The taulest Cedars have the fairest growe.
Even then,
When thus:
Pride did intend the sequell of my ruth,
Beganne the faultes and follies of my youth.

I left the fields, and tooke me to the towne,
Fould sheepe who list, the hooke was cast away,
Menalcas would not be a countrie clowne,
Nor shepheards weedes, but garments farre more gay,
Even then,
When thus:
Aspiring thoughts did followe after ruth,
Began the faultes and follies of my youth.

My sutes were silke, my talke was all of state,
I stretcht beyond the compasse of my sleeve,
The bravest Courtier was Menalcas mate,
Spend what I could I never thought on griefe.
Even then,
When thus:
I lasht out lavish then began my ruth,
And then I felt the follies of my youth.

I cast mine eye on every wanton face,
And straight desire did hale me on to love,
Then lover-like, I prayd for Venus grace,
That she my mistresse deepe affects might move.
Even then,
When thus,
Love trapt me in the fatall bands of ruth,
Beganne the faultes and follies of my youth.

No cost I spar'd, to please my Mistresse eye,
No time ill spent in presence of her sight,
Yet oft she fround, and then her love must dye,
But when she smyl'd, oh then a happie wight.
Even then,
When thus,
Desire did drawe me on to deeme of ruth,
Beganne the faultes and follies of my youth.

The day in poems often did I passe,
The night in sighes and sorrowes for her grace,
And she as fickle as the brittle glasse,
Helde sunshine showres within her flattering face.
Even then,
When thus:
I spied the woes that weomens loves ensueth,
I sawe and loath, the follies of my youth.

I noted oft that beautie was a blase,
I saw that love was but a heape of cares,
That such as stoode as Deare do at the gase,
And sought their welth amongst affections shares
Even such,
I sawe,
With hoat pursute did follow after ruth,
And fostered up the follies of their youth.

Thus clog'd with love with passions and with griefe,
I saw the country life had least molest,
I felt a wound and faine would have reliefe,
And this resolv'd I thought would fall out best:
Even then,
When thus:
I felt my senses almost solde to ruth,
I thought to leave the follies of my youth,

To flockes againe, away the wanton towne,
Fond pride avaunt, give me the shepheards hooke,
A coate of gray, Ile be a country clowne:
Mine eye shall scorne on beauty for to looke.
No more,
A doe:
Both Pride and love, are ever pain'd with ruth,
And therefore farewell the follies of my youth.
